#separator:tab
#html:false
Ecosystem	All the organisms living in a habitat and the non-living parts of the habitat.
Competition in ecosystems	Competition will occur between organisms in an ecosystem when their niches overlap, they both try to use the same resource and the resource is in short supply. Animals compete for food, water and space to live. Plants compete for light, water, minerals and root space.
Interdependence	Species rely on eachother for food, shelter, pollination, seed dispersal etc.
Abiotic and Biotic factors.	Abiotic: non living. Biotic: living.
Examples of Abiotic factors:	light intensity, temperature, moisture levels, wind intensity and direction, carbon dioxide levels for plants, soil PH and mineral content.
Examples of Biotic factors:	availabilty of food, new predators arriving, new pathogens/diseases, one species outcompeting another.
Extremophile definition	Organisms that live in environments that are very extreme.
What do decomposers need?	Oxygen, moisture, a suitable temperature and a suitable PH.
How do decomposers break down waste?	By secreting enzymes, which partly digest the waste.
What happens when waste is broken down in anaerobic conditions?	Methane gas is produced.
Carbon cycle, what does it rely on ?	Describes how carbon is recycled in nature. It relies on decomposers to return carbon to the atmosphere as carbon dioxide through respiration.
The water cycle.	Describes how fresh water circulates between living organisms, rivers and the sea.
Name the stages in a food chain.	Producer, primary consumer, secondary consumer, tertiary consumers.
Trophic levels.	Each of the feeding levels (producer, primary, secondary etc) is called a trophic level, represeted by numbers.
Apex predatores.	Carnioveres with no predators.
Biodiversity. Why we need a high biodiversity.	The variety of all different species of organisms on earth.  Because it helps ecosystems become stable as species depend on eachother for food and shelter.
Factors that put biodiversity at risk. What are these factors due too?	Changes in:               Changes due to:  -availabilty of water    -human activity -temperature              -changes in seasons -atmospheric gases   -geographic activity
How does pollution affect biodiversity? Why's this an increasing issue?	Kills animals and plants. Human population is increasing, more pollution.
How overexploitation affects biodiversity?	Humans can take too many resources out of the environment for animals and plants, including destryoing habitats plants and animals live on.
What are peat bogs and why destroying them is bad for environment and biodiversity.	They are a very important store of carbon. We call them carbon sinks. If all the peat was removed and burned this would quickly release a huge volume of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere and contribute to the greenhouse effect. Destroys habitats of organisms too.
Biological consequences of global warming.	-loss of habitat, when low-lying areas of flooded by rising sea levels. -changes to migration patterns of animals. -changes in distribution of animals/plants in areas where temp/rainfall has changed.
Attempts/methods used to conserve biodiversity.	-recycling resources instead of dumping waste  -reducing deforestation and co2 emissions -protecting rare habitats such as coral reefs -setting up breeding programmes for endangered species
Factors affecting food security.	-increasing birth rate. -changing diets in developed countries. -new pests/pathogens affecting agriculture. -changes in weather e.g: drought. -conflict.
What do pyramids of biomass show?	They show the energy flow through ecosystems more clearly than foodchains.
How much % of biomass is stransferred to the level above it (trophic levels/pyramids of biomass0	10%
Losses of biomass are due to:	-some of food taken in being passed out of body via faeces. -large amounts of glucose used in respiration.
Biotechnology. The microorganisms are grown where?	Allows microorgansims to be grown in large quantities of food. Fermenters - industrial sized vents.
The fungus Fusarium is useful for producing Mycoprotein, Mycoprotein characteristics:	-protein-rich -low in fat -high in fibre -suitable for vegetarians
Why are some crops GM (gentically modified) ?	-Provide more food. or -Improved nutritional value.
Homeostatis definiton - Why is it important?	The regulation of the internal conditions of a cell or organism in response to internal and external changes. It's important because it keeps conditions constant for enzymes action and cell functions.
Homeostatis includes the control of ...	-blood glucose concentration -body temp -water and ion levels
All control systems include what?	-cells called receptors (detect stimuli) -coordination centres (recieve and process info from receptors) -effectors (muscle or glands which bring out responses that restore optimum levels)
Negative feedback control mechanism diagram:	The coordinating centre compares the stimulus to a set point. ----->                                                      ^                                                                                                                                                            |                                                                                                      An effector then produces a response                                                     |                                                                                                       to correct any differences from the set                                                          |                                                                               <-------------------  point.                                                  |                                                   |  A receptor detects a change in stimulus.
What does the thermoregulatory centre in the brain do?	-monitors/controls body temps. -has receptors that monitor the temperature of the blood flowing through the skin. -recieves information(impulses) from temperature receptors in the skin.
What does our body do if we are too hot? (body temps too warm)	-vasodilation -more sweat produced by sweat glands and evaporates
What does our body do if it's too cold? (body temp too low)	-vasocontriction, which directs blood away from the surface of the skin. -sweating stops -we shiver (skeletal muscles uncontrollably contract and relax quickly transferring more heat to the blood)
The nervous system:	Enables humans to react to their surroundings and coordinate their behvaiour.
Central nevous system (CNS)  What does the CNS do? examples	Info from receptors is passed to CNS (brain and spinal cord). The CNS coordinates responses of ther effectors, E.g: muscles contracting or glands secreting hormones.
Reflex actions	They are rapid and automatically to provide protection, are done subconsciously.
Process of reflex actions (steps 1-5)	1- Pain stimulus detected by receptors 2- Impulses from the receptor pass along a sensory neurone to the CNS 3- Impulse then passes through a relay neurone 4- A motor neurone carries an impulse to the effector 5- The effector responds, E.g: moves a limb away from source of pain
Cerebral cortex functions:	-resposible for consciousness, intelligence, memory and langauge.
Cerebellum functions:	-coordinates movement and balance
Medulla functions:	-controls automatic actions such as heartbeat and breathing.
How have scientists been able to map fucntions of the brain?	-MRI scans -studying patients with brain damage -electrically stimulating diff parts of the brain
The eye: retina: optic nerve: sclera: iris: cilary muscles and suspensory ligaments: accommodation:	-retina contains receptor cells sensitive to light -optic nerve carries impulses from retina to the brain -sclera is a tough outer layer which has a cornea the front (transparent) -iris controls the size of the pupil therefore amount of light reaching the retina -they change the shape of the lens in order to focus light into the retina -accommodation is the process of changing the shape of the lens to focus on things far/close.
Common defects of the eye (two)	-Hyperopia(long-sightedness) -Myopia (short-sightedness)
Endocrine system:	Made up of glands that secrete hormones directly into the bloodstream
Hormones: Difference between hormones and the nervous system	-Chemical messengers that are carried in the blood to a target organwhere they produce an effect. -Effects of hormones act slower and act for longer compared with those of the nervous system.
Where's adrenaline produced?  What does it do?	"-Produced in adrenal gland in times of fear/stress. -Increases heart rate,increasing delivery of oxygen to muscles and brain. -Preparing body for ""fight"" or ""flight"""
Where's thyroxine produced? What does it do? What's it controlled by?	-Produced in thyroid gland. -Increases metabolic rate, controls growth/development in young animal. -Controlled by negative feedback.
Blood glucose is monitored and controlled by the pancreas. If blood glucose concentration is too high:	-pancreas releases more of a hormone insulin -insulin causes glucose to move from blood into the cells  -in the liver and muscle cells, excess glucose is converted to glycogen for storage.
If blood glucose concentration is too low:	-Pancreas releases glucagon -Glucagon stimulates glycogen to be converted into glucose and released into the blood Example of negative feedback ^
What's type 1 diabetes caused by: Treated by?	-by the pancreas failing to produce sufficient insulin -resulting in high blood glucose levels -insulin injections
What's type 2 diabetes caused by: Treated by?	-caused by ther body cells no loger responding to insulin -has obesity as a risk factor -carbohydrate controlled diet and regular exercise.
What's the balance of water and ions in the body regulated by?	The kidneys which also excrete urea as a waste product.
The digestion of proteins of foods results in ...Deamination: What does ammoniado?	Results in excess amino acids.In the liver excess amino acids are converted to ammonia. Ammonia is toxic, so it immediately converred to urea and sent to  kidneys for safe excretion.
How do the kidneys produce urine? (stages)	1- Filtering the blood 2- Selective reabsorbtion of useful substances, such as glucose some ions and water 3- This leaves urea and excesss water and ions to form urine
What's the water level in the body controleld by? How does this work	-the hormone ADH -ADH is released by pituitary gland when the blood is too concentrated. -It passes, in the blood, to the kidney tubules(millions of small tubes in the kidney) where it cause more water to be reabsorbed back into the blood.
How are people with kidney failure treated?	-Organ transplant -Kidney dialysis
Oestrogen: Ovulation:	-Formed in ovaries, main female sex hormone. -Eggs begin to mature and be released.
Testosterone: What's the menstrual cycle?	-Main male sex hormone, produced by testes and stimulates sperm production. -Monthly cycle of events which produces mature egg (28days)
Hormone                                       Secreted by           Function in menstrual cycle Follicle stimulating hormone      (FSH)                                                                                                                                              Oestrogen                                                                                                                                                    Luteinising hormone (LH)                                                                                                                                                      Progesterone	Secrted by:                                                                -Causes eggs to mature in ovaries                                              -Pituitary gland             -Srimulates the ovaries to produce oestrogen                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -Inhibits FSH release                                              -Ovaries                       -Stimulates LH release                                                                                   -Makes lining of the uterus grow again after menstruation                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -Srimulates the release of the egg from the ovary (ovulation)                                              -Pituitary gland                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -Inhibits FSH and LH release                                              -Empty follicle in the        -Maintains the lining of the uterus during the second half of the cycle                                                ovaries
Hormonal contracpetion methods:	-Oral contraceptives (the pill) that contains oestrogen and progesterone, which inhibit FSH production so that no eggs are released. -An injection, either skin patch or implant of slow release progesterone to stop the release of eggs for a several number of months to years.
Non-hormonal contraception methods:	-Barrier methodds (condom or diaphragm) prevent sperm reaching the egg. -Surgical methods of male/female sterilisation such as cutting sperm ducts. -Not having intercourse when an egg may be in the oviduct. -Intrauterine devices, prevent embryos implanting in the uterus. -Spermicidal creams, kill/disable sperm.
Increasing fertility and why?	-Doctors may give patients FSH and LH in a fertility drug to a woman if her FSH is too low to stimulate eggs to mature.
IVF treatement involves... (In vitro fertilisation)	-Giving a woman FSH and LHto stimulate the growth of many eggs. -Collecting the eggs from the women. -Fertilising the eggs with sperm from the father in the laboratory. -Inserting one or two embryos into the woman's uterus.
IVF treatement downsides:	-emotionally and physically stressful. -success rates are not high. -can lead to multiple births, risk to babies and mother.
Tropism: What are the types of Tropism? What are tropisms caused by?	-When parts of a plant responds by growing in a particular direction. -Gravitrophic and Phototrophic. -Auxins (group of plant hormones)
Growth of roots in gravitrophic Growth of shoots in gravitrophic	Roots: towards/positively, roots go down (towards gravity) Shoots: away/negatively
Growth of roots in phototrophic: Growth of shoots in phototrophic:	Roots: away/negatively. Shoots: towards/positively, shoot bends towards the light.
Auxins response to light (phototrophism) In shoots: In roots:	Shoots:1-More light reaches one side of a shoot 2-More auxin is sent down the shaded side of the shoot 3-Resulting in cells in the shaded regionelongating more 4-Therefore the shoot grows towards the light. Roots: In roots auxin moves to the bottom of the root and causes less elongation therefore root grows downwards.
Auxins response to gravity (geotropism) Roots:	Roots:-Auxin moves towards the side facing down -Growth is inhibited so root grows downwards.
Gibberellins: Ethene:	-Another group of plants hormones and are important in initiating seed germination. -Is a gas and plant hormone, controls cell division and ripening of fruits.
What auxins are used as: What Gibberllins used for:	Auxins: -As rooting powders, they make cuttings produce roots when they are planted. -As weedkillers, they make the weeds grow so quickly tehy use up their food reserve and die.Gibberellins: -can make seeds germinate and end seed dormancy. -increase fruit size -promote flowering, plants flower on demand.
Asexual reproduction (plants) involves:	-one parent -no mixing genetic information -mitosis -the production of genetically identical offspring (cloned)
Examples of asexual reproduction	-fungi reproduce asexually by spores. -strawberry plants send out long shoots called runners, which touch the groud and grow a new plant.
What does sexual reproduction involve: (human and plant)	-sperm and egg cells in animals -pollen and egg cells in plant cells
What happens when a cell divides by meiosis:	-copies of genetic information are made -the cell divides twice to form four gametes each with a single set of chromosomes. -all gametes are genetically different.
Why meiosis is important?:	Because it halves the number of chromosomes in gametes, meaning fertilisation can restore the full number of chromosomes.
Meiosis stages (1-6)	1-cell with two pairs of chromomes (diploid cell) 2-each chromosome replicates itself 3-chromosomes part company and move to opposite poles 4-cell divides for the first time, there's now two, one pair of chromosomes in each. 5-copies now seperate cell, second cell divison occurs 6-four haploid cells each with half the number of chromosomes of the parent cell.
Advantages of sexual reproduction:	-Produces variation in offspring -Allows humans to selectively breed plants/animals, increased food production.
Advantages opf asexual reproduction:	-Only one parent is needed. -Faster than sexual reproduction -Many identical offspirng can be produced -More time and energy efficient
What's a genome?	The entire gentic information of an organism.
What is a gene? What's DNA contained in? What is DNA?	-A small section of DNA on a chromosome. -Chromosomes. -A polymer made up of repeating units called nucleotides
Important uses of findings of human genome.	-can investigate how humans have changed over time. -help identify causes of inherited disorders and how to treat them. -can search for genes linked to diff types of disorder.
What is DNA made up of? What each ....... is made up of:	-DNA is a polymer made up of repeating units called nucleotides. -Nucleotides: a sugar a phosphate either AT or GC
In nucleotides which bases attatch to eachother?	C----G   on opposite strand T----A     on opposite strand
What does each gene code for?	For a particular sequence of amino acids, to make a specific protein.
A sequence of three bases is code for....	one amino acid.
Mutation definition	-A change in DNA structure.
A few mutations that may cause the protein to have a different shape:   Not all parts of the DNA code for proteins:	-If it is an enzyme, then the substrate may no loner fit the active site. -If it is a structural protein, it may lose its strength.   -Non coding parts of DNA can switch genes on/off so they can/cannot make changes to specific proteins. -Mutations in these areas can affect how the DNA genes are shown.
Describe the contribution Gregor Mendel made to the study of genetics:	"19th century-He investigated sexual reproduction by carrying out breeding experiments on pea plants. -He found: characteristics are determined by ""units"" that are inherited. 20th century -Scientists realised chromosomes and ""units"" behaved in similar ways. -""units"" are what we call genes, were located on chromsomes."
Alleles definition: Alleles can be either...  Genotype definition: Phenotype defintion: Homozygous: Heterozygous:	-When a gene has different forms.  dominant or recessive.   -The combination of alleles.   -How the alleles are presented.   -If the two alleles present are the same.   -If the alleles are different.
Monohybrid inheritence: Diagrams used to show this:	-If only one gene is involved in controlling a characteristic it's called monohybrid inheritence. -Punnett squares. Capital letters for dominant alleles. Lower case letters for recessive alleles.
What is Polyactyly? and what is it caused by?   What is Cystic fibrosis? and what is it caused by?	-having extra fingers/toes Caused by dominant allele   -a disorder of cell membrane Caused by recissive allele
How many pairs contain the genes that determine sex? In men sex chromosomes are called? In women sex chromosomes are called?	-One pair out of 23 (called sex chromosomes) -men: YX -women:XX
Variation: Variation due too:	-Differences in the characteristics of individuals.   -Inherited genes -Conditions individuals have developed (nurture) -combination of genetic and environmental causes
What is natural selection as stated by Darwin? Darwin's 4 important observations: Darwin's conclusions:	-That all species have evolved from basic lifeforms that first developed 3 billion years ago.   -organisms often produce lots of offspring -populations usually stay the same size -organisms are all slightly different -characteristics can be inherited   -There's a struggle for existence. -More organisms born than can survive -The ones that survive are the ones best suited to enviornment and ones that breed(long necked giraffes) -Passing on their characterists to offspring -Over long time characteristics of species change
Where's the eidence for Darwins theory been found? Weaknesses of fossil records:   How does the theory of natural selection show the development of antibiotic resistant strains	In fossils, to show how organisms have changed over long periods of time. -Organsims years ago were soft bodied, therefore eroded.   -Bacteria reproduce rapidly with many mutations. -Some are resistant to antibiotics therefore live and reproduce more resitant bacteria. -Resistant strain develops.
Selective breeding definition: The steps(1-4) The types of characteristic that could be selected include:	-The process by which humans breed plants and animals with particular, desirable genetic traits.   1-choose parents that show best genetic traits 2-breed them together 3-from the ofspring, again choose the ones with desired characteristics and breed 4-continue for generations   -disease resistance in food crops -animals that produce more meat/milk -dogs with a gentle nature -large/unusual flowers
Genetic engineering: Process of genetic engineering (1-3)	-Changing the characterisitcs of an organism by introducing a gene from another organism.   1-enzymes are used to isolate the required gene 2-this gene is inserted into a vector 3-the vector is used to insert the gene into required cells.
Plants have been genetically modified (GM) to:	-be resistant to diseases, insects or herbicide attacks -produce bigger/better fruits
What type of reproduction are clones produced by?   Artificial ways of producing clones:   How can clones be produced in animals?   Method to produce clones with animals cells (1-5)	-asexual   -cuttings: used by garderners -tissue culture: uses small groups of cells to grow new plants and used to preserve rare plant species.   -By splitting apart cells from the embryo before they become specialised and then transplanting the identical embryos into host mothers.   1-remove nucleus from unfertilised egg 2-insert the nucleus from an adult body cell of the organism you want to clone into the empty egg cell 3-stimulate the egg cell to divide using an electric shock 4-allow the resulting embryo to develop into a ball of cells 5-insert the embryo into the womv of a surrogate female to continue its development
Exctinctions caused by:	-change of environment -new predators -new diseases -new, more succesful competitors
Speciation definition:   Stages of speciation (1-4)	The formation of new biological species   1-populations become physically isolated from each other 2-genetic variation is present between two populations 3-natural selection operates differently in the two populations 4-the populations become so different that succesful interbreeding is no longer possible
Principles of classification Carl Linnaeus classified living things into:   Parts of the binomial sysetm:	kingdom--->phylum--->class--->order--->family--->genus--->species.   -first part is the genus -second part is their species
Three-domain system developed by Carl Woese:	Organisms are divided into: -archea (primitive bacteria, usually living in extreme environments) -bacteria (true bacteria) -eukaryota (including protists, fungi, plants and animals)
What are the DNA pairs?	AT and GC
