#separator:tab
#html:false
What is electrolysis?	The process in which electrical energy, from a direct current, decomposes electrolytes.
What is an electrolyte?	Ionic compounds that are in a molten state or dissolved in water (aqueous).
The front of this card is blank. More information	The front of this card is blank. More information
What does passing a current through substances that are molten or solution ensure that?	The solution can be broken down into elements.
What does your solution contain when you have an ionic solution (not a molten ionic compound)?	- The​ ​ions​ ​that​ ​make​ ​up​ ​the​ ​ionic​ ​compound. - The​ ​ions​ ​in​ ​water (OH​-​​ ​and​ ​H​+​).
What happens at the cathode?	- Hydrogen​ ​(from​ ​H​+​​ ​in​ ​water)​ ​is​ ​produced​ ​unless​ ​+​ ​ions​ ​in​ ​the​ ​ionic compound​ ​are​ ​from​ ​a​ ​metal​ ​less​ ​reactive​ ​than​ ​hydrogen. - If metal is less reactive -  metal is produced instead.
What happens at the anode?	- Oxygen​ ​(from​ ​OH​-​​ ​in​ ​water)​ ​will​ ​be​ ​produced​ ​unless​ ​ionic​ ​compound contains​ ​halide​ ​ions​ ​(Cl​-​,​ ​Br​-​,​ ​I​-​). - If​ ​there​ ​are​ ​halide​ ​ions -​ ​halogen ​produced​ ​instead​ ​(e.g.​ ​Cl​2​)
Electrolysis of Copper Chloride solution	- Cu+ ions go to cathode - Cu(s) produced - Cu = less reactive than hydrogen. - Cl- ions go to anode - Cl2(g) produced - Cl- = halide ions.
OILRIG	- Oxidation Is Loss (of electrons) - Reduction Is Gain (of electrons)
What happens at the cathode (in terms o oxidation and reduction)?	
Electronic Configuration Rule	1st Shell = 2 Electrons 2nd Shell = 8 Electrons  3rd Shell = 8 Electrons 4th Shell = 2 Electrons
Properties of Non-Metals	- Dull looking - Brittle - Lower boiling points (generally not solid at room temp.) - Don't generally conduct electricity - Lower density
Cation	Positive ion
Anion	Negative ion
What is metallic bonding?	"Strong attraction between closely packed metal ions and a ""sea"" of delocalised electrons."
How did Mendeleev predict the existence and properties of some elements yet to be discovered?	He used the properties of other elements in the column.
Relative Mass of a Proton	1
How have ideas about the atom changed over time?	- He thought they were solid spheres. - JJ Thompson created Plum Pudding Model. - Rutherford said there was a positively charged nucleus and a cloud of electrons. - Bohr said electrons moved on fixed shells.
Relative Mass of an Electron	0.0005/Negligible
How are atoms of different elements different?	Different numbers of subatomic particles.
What kind of electron arrangement is most stable?	Full Outer Shell
Advantages and Disadvantages of 2D Representations of Substances	Advantages: - Shows what atoms something contains and how they are connected.   Disadvantages: - Doesn't show shape of substance or size of atoms.
Advantages and Disadvantages of Dot and Cross Diagrams	Advantages:  - Shows how compounds/molecules are formed. - Shows where the electrons in the bonds or ions come from.   Disadvantages:  - Doesn't show size of atom/ions or how they're arranged.
Why are metals malleable?	"Layers of metal atoms slide over each other and the ""sea"" of electrons hold them together."
Properties, Structure and Bonding of Graphene	- One layer of graphite. - Sheet of carbon atoms joined in hexagons. - Sheet = 1 atom thick - 2D compound.
What is an Allotrope?	Different forms of the same element.
How does the size of an atom compare to the size of its nucleus?	Nucleus is tiny compared to overall atom.
What is an energy level (shell)?	Area of space in an atom which can be occupied by electrons.
Formula for Relative Atomic Mass	Relative Mass x Abundance (in decimals) - Add up all answers to get total
Why can metals conduct electricity and heat?	Delocalised electrons carry an electrical current or thermal energy through the material.
Advantages and Disadvantages of Ball and Stick Models	Advantages: - Can visualise structures - shows shape of lattice/molecule in 3D. - More realistic.   Disadvantages: - Shows big gaps between atoms - in reality this is where electron clouds interact. - Doesn't show correct scales of atoms/ions.
Relative Mass of a Neutron	1
Properties of Giant Covalent Structures	- All atoms bonded together by strong covalent bonds. - High melting and boiling points. - Generally don't conduct electricity - no charged particle (except graphite + graphene). - Insoluble in water.
What is an Atomic Number?	Number of protons/electrons.
Physical Properties of Metals	- High melting and boiling points - Shiny - High density - Malleable - Conductor of electricity and heat - Aren't soluble in water
Why do atoms have no overall charge?	Have same number of protons and electrons - charges cancel out.
What is a Mass Number?	Number of protons and neutrons in an atom.
Difference Between the Chemical Properties of Metals and Non-Metals	- Non-metals tend to gain electrons to form full outer shells (Anion). - Metals tend to lose electrons to form full outer shells (Cation).
Advantages and Disadvantages of 3D Models?	Advantages: - Shows arrangement of ions. - Shows size and shape of atoms.   Disadvantages: - Only shows outer layer.
Properties, Structure and Bonding of Graphite	- High melting point. - Only 3/4 of outer electrons used in bonds so 1 free electron to conduct electricity. - No covalent bonds between layers - held together weakly - makes if soft and slippery. - Each atoms forms 3 covalent bonds - sheets of atoms in hexagons.
Properties, Structure and Bonding of Diamond	- Shiny - Transparent - High melting and boiling point - Insoluble in water - Doesn't conduct electricity - no free electrons - Giant lattice molecular structure - Each carbon atom in strong covalent bond to 4 other carbon atoms.
Why is the relative atomic mass of many elements not a whole number?	It is the mean mass of an atom of an element, relative to the mass of Carbon 12.
How is an element's electron arrangement linked to its position in the Periodic Table?	- Number of electrons on its outer shell is its group number (column). - Number of shells it has is its period (row).
How strong are the electrostatic forces between metal ions and delocalised electrons?	Very strong
Where is most of the mass of an atom found?	In the nucleus
Isotope	- Different forms of the same element. - Same number of protons (atomic number) but different number of neutrons (mass number).
Ion	An atom that is positively or negatively charged because it has lost or gained one or more electrons.
What does a bond do in an element/compound?	Hold atoms together.
How strong are covalent bonds?	Very strong
What happens when an atom becomes an ion (in terms of shells)?	Become more stable - have complete outer shell of electrons.
Ionic Bond	- Electrons transferred between metal and non-metal.- Electrostatic force of attraction between cation and an anion. - Usually between a metal and a non-metal.
Fullerene	"- Molecules of carbon - shaped like closed tubes or hollow balls. - Mainly made up of carbon atoms arranged in hexagons but can also be pentagons or heptagons. - Can be used to ""cage"" other molecules - fullerene structure forms around molecule trapped inside. - Could be used to deliver a drug directly to cells. - Huge surface area - could make industrial catalysts - individual catalysts attached to fullerenes (larger surface area = better)."
Nanotubes	- Fullerenes - Tiny cylinders of graphene - conduct electricity. - High tensile strength - don't break when stretched. - Used to strengthen materials without adding much weight (e.g. tennis rackets).
Buckminsterfullerene	- Molecular formula = C60 - Forms hollow sphere made up of 20 hexagons and 12 pentagons. - Stable molecule that forms soft brownish-black crystals.
How did Mendeleev arrange elements in the Periodic Table?	Into groups and columns based on relative atomic masses and chemical properties.
Subatomic Particles in an Atom	- Protons and neutrons in nucleus - middle of atom. - Electrons move round nucleus in electron shells.
Boiling Point of Water	100°C
What is Fractional Distillation for?	Separating liquids
Gas => Solid	Depostion
Soluble	A substance that will dissolve.
Freezing Point of Water	0°C
What is Simple Distillation used for?	Separating a liquid (solvent) out of a solution.
What are the 3 states of matter?	- Solid - Liquid - Gas
3 Methods of Purifying Water	- Filtration - Sedimentation - Chlorination
Why are state changes physical changes?	The particles themselves have not changed, only their arrangement, movement and amount of energy stored.
Concentration	Amount of something per unit volume.
Movement of Particles in a Gas	Fast in all directions
What is a molecule?	A group of atoms bonded together.
Arrangement of Particles in a Liquid	Close together and random
Equation for a Solution	Solute (solid) + Solvent (liquid) ===> Solution
Insoluble	Describes a substance that will not dissolve.
Movement of Particles in a Solid	Vibrate about in a fixed position.
Energy in a Liquid	Less than gas; more than solid.
Energy in a Solid	Smallest amount of stored energy.
Solute	Substance that dissolves in a liquid to form a solution.
"""Pure"" Substance"	Substance completely made up of a single element or compound.
Solid => Gas	Sublimation
What is a melting point?	Temperature a solid turns into a liquid.
What are the forces that hold ions together?	Electrostatic Forces
Energy in a Gas	Largest amount of stored energy.
Chromatography	A separating technique used to separate two or more soluble substances.
What can you use Chromatography for?	A Purity Test
What happens to energy when a substance becomes a gas?	Energy is transferred from surroundings to particles (more than in a liquid).
What kind of electron arrangement is most stable?	Full outer shell
How are the atoms of different elements different?	Have different numbers of subatomic particles.
What are the 2 types of distillation?	- Fractional - Simple
What happens to energy when a substance becomes a solid?	Energy transferred from particles to surroundings.
How many phases does Chromatography have?	2
What is a concentrated solution?	Solution that has large number of particles of the solute in the solvent.
Saturated Solution	Contains the maximum amount of solute that can dissolve in that amount of solvent at that temperature.
Diffusion	The movement of particles from an area of high concentration to an area of low concentration.
What is a material?	Combinations of different substances.
Molecules	Groups of atoms held together by covalent bonds.
What is the stationary phase in chromatography?	The piece of filter paper.
What is a substance?	Something which is made of matter/particles.
What will molecules with a higher solubility in the solvent do during chromatography?	They are less attracted to the paper and will spend more time in the mobile phase - they'll be carried further up the paper.
What happens to energy when a substance becomes a liquid?	Energy is transferred from the surroundings to the particles.
Properties of Chemical Changes?	- Not easily reversible - Makes new chemical - E.g. sour milk, burning wood, etc.
What kinds of elements usually form molecules?	Non-metals
What affects the amount of time molecules spend in each phase of chromatography?	- How soluble they are in the solvent. - How attracted they are to the stationary phase.
What is a dilute solution?	A solution that has a small number of particles of the solute in the solvent.
What is suspension?	A mixture between a liquid and particles of a solid - the particles do not dissolve.
Residue	Material remaining in the filter after a mixture has passed through.
3 Factors that Change the Rate of Diffusion	- Temperature - Concentration - Surface Area to Volume Ratio
Filtrate	A solution that has passed through a filter.
Movement of Particles in a Liquid	They move around each other.
What sort of melting point does a mixture have?	A range of melting points.
What sort of melting point does a pure substance have?	Specific melting point.
Arrangement of Particles in a Solid	Close together and regular
Solvent	Liquid in which a solute dissolves in.
Solution	Mixture formed when a solute has dissolved in a solvent.
Compound	Substance made when 2 or more elements are chemically bonded together.
What is the Mobile Phase in Chromatography?	Solvent
Desalination	Producing pure water from sea water.
Chemical Analysis	Using chemical reactions or sensitive machines to identify and measure the substances in a sample.
Arrangement of Particles in a Gas	Far apart and random
Can Physical Changes be Reversed?	Yes - the chemical properties of the substances do not change.
What type of changes are state changes?	Physical changes - response to forces and energy.
What is a mixture?	When some elements or compounds are mixed together and intermingle - it is not a pure substance.
What is a boiling point?	Temperature a liquid turns into a gas.
Which of these, if any, is pure water? Mineral water, tap water, seawater	None of them
What is an Rf Value?	The ratio between the distance travelled by the dissolved substance and the distance travelled by the solvent.
Formula for Rf Value	Rf = Distance Travelled by Solute ÷ Distance Travelled by Solvent
