#separator:tab
#html:false
What are the solid organs in the abdominal cavity?	Liver, spleen, pancreas, kidneys, and women (in women).
Liver, spleen, pancreas, kidneys, and women (in women).	What are the solid organs in the abdominal cavity?
What are the hollow organs in the abdominal cavity?	Gallbladder, stomach, small intestine, large intestine, and urinary bladder.
Gallbladder, stomach, small intestine, large intestine, and urinary bladder.	What are the hollow organs in the abdominal cavity?
What does the liver do?	Assists in digestion by secreting bile, filters toxic substances, creates glucose stores, and produces substances necessary for blood clotting and immune functions
Assists in digestion by secreting bile, filters toxic substances, creates glucose stores, and produces substances necessary for blood clotting and immune functions	What does the liver do?
What does the gallbladder do?	Acts as a reservoir for bile.
Acts as a reservoir for bile.	What does the gallbladder do?
What are the three sections of the small intestines?	duodenum, jejunum, ileum
duodenum, jejunum, ileum	What are the three sections of the small intestines?
What does the pancreas do?	Aids digestion by secreting juice that contains enzymes that help break down starches, fats, and protein. Also releases amylase.
Aids digestion by secreting juice that contains enzymes that help break down starches, fats, and protein. Also releases amylase.	What does the pancreas do?
What is amylase?	It is responsible for breaking down starches into sugars and is present in saliva and the duodenum.
It is responsible for breaking down starches into sugars and is present in saliva and the duodenum.	What is amylase?
Where does amylase come from and go into?	It comes from the pancreas and goes into the duodenum.
It comes from the pancreas and goes into the duodenum.	Where does amylase come from and go into?
What is bicarbonate?	It is an alkali and is part of the buffering system that neutraizes stomach acids in the duodenum. It also comes from the pancreas.
It is an alkali and is part of the buffering system that neutraizes stomach acids in the duodenum. It also comes from the pancreas.	What is bicarbonate?
What is insulin?	It regulates the amount of glucose in the bloodstream, and is produced in the pancreas.
It regulates the amount of glucose in the bloodstream, and is produced in the pancreas.	What is insulin?
What is the jejunum?	It is the second part of the small intestine and pays a major role in the absorption of digestive products. It comprises much of the surface area of the small intestine.
It is the second part of the small intestine and pays a major role in the absorption of digestive products. It comprises much of the surface area of the small intestine.	What is the jejunum?
What kind of environment does the jejunum and ileum have?	They have a mostly pH-neutral environment for absorption.
They have a mostly pH-neutral environment for absorption.	What kind of environment does the jejunum and ileum have?
What is the ileum?	The ileum is the third part of the intestine, and is where soluble molecules are absorbed into the blood, and where proteins, fats, and starches are reduced to amino acids, fatty acids, and simple sugars.
The ileum is the third part of the intestine, and is where soluble molecules are absorbed into the blood, and where proteins, fats, and starches are reduced to amino acids, fatty acids, and simple sugars.	What is the ileum?
What is peristalsis?	It is a rhythmic movement that moves waste matter through the intestines.
It is a rhythmic movement that moves waste matter through the intestines.	What is peristalsis?
What is the spleen?	It is located is located in the abdomen but has no digestive function. It is part of the lymphatic system, assists in filtering blood, developing red blood cells and antibodies, and serves as a blood reservoir.
It is located is located in the abdomen but has no digestive function. It is part of the lymphatic system, assists in filtering blood, developing red blood cells and antibodies, and serves as a blood reservoir.	What is the spleen?
What do the kidneys do?	They play an important role in the regulation of acidity and blood pressure, and remove sodium chloride from the body and therefore excess fluid.
They play an important role in the regulation of acidity and blood pressure, and remove sodium chloride from the body and therefore excess fluid.	What do the kidneys do?
How much of the output of blood from the heart passes through the kidneys each minute?	Nearly 20% of the heart's output passes through them.
Nearly 20% of the heart's output passes through them.	How much of the output of blood from the heart passes through the kidneys each minute?
What is the renal pelvis?	It is a cone-shaped collecting area that connects the ureter and the kidney.
It is a cone-shaped collecting area that connects the ureter and the kidney.	What is the renal pelvis?
Where is the urinary bladder?	It is located immediately behind the pubis symphysis.
It is located immediately behind the pubis symphysis.	Where is the urinary bladder?
How much urine does the average adult form each day?	They form 1.5 to 2L of it each day.
They form 1.5 to 2L of it each day.	How much urine does the average adult form each day?
How much blood circulates through the kidneys daily?	c. 1,500 L of blood flows through them daily.
c. 1,500 L of blood flows through them daily.	How much blood circulates through the kidneys daily?
What lines the abdominal cavity?	The parietal peritoneum lines it.
The parietal peritoneum lines it.	What lines the abdominal cavity?
What lines the organs themselves?	The visceral peritoneum lines them.
The visceral peritoneum lines them.	What lines the organs themselves?
What is peritonitis?	This is irritation of the peritoneum.
This is irritation of the peritoneum.	What is peritonitis?
What is ileus?	This is paralysis of the muscular contractions that normally propel material through the intestines. It can lead to abdominal distention.
This is paralysis of the muscular contractions that normally propel material through the intestines. It can lead to abdominal distention.	What is ileus?
What is emesis?	Vomiting caused by paralysis in the intestines.
Vomiting caused by paralysis in the intestines.	What is emesis?
How do you gauge the degree of distention in a patient?	To do this, simply look at the patient's abdomen.
To do this, simply look at the patient's abdomen.	How do you gauge the degree of distention in a patient?
What else is also associated with peritonitis?	It is also associated with a loss of body fluid into the abdominal cavity. This fluid shift decreases the volume of circulating blood and may lead to decreased blood pressure or even shock.
It is also associated with a loss of body fluid into the abdominal cavity. This fluid shift decreases the volume of circulating blood and may lead to decreased blood pressure or even shock.	What else is also associated with peritonitis?
If a patient has peritonitis that has progressed, what will they present with?	In this case, they will present with tachycardia and hypotension.
In this case, they will present with tachycardia and hypotension.	If a patient has peritonitis that has progressed, what will they present with?
What can parietal peritoneum nerves sense?	They can sense pain, touch, pressure, heat, and cold, and can easily localize pain.
They can sense pain, touch, pressure, heat, and cold, and can easily localize pain.	What can parietal peritoneum nerves sense?
What can visceral peritoneum sense?	"It can not localize sensation, so the patient will describe such pain as a ""deep"" pain."
"It can not localize sensation, so the patient will describe such pain as a ""deep"" pain."	What can visceral peritoneum sense?
What is referred pain?	It is the result of connections between somatic and autonomic nervous system, so that pain may be perceived at a distant point of the body.
It is the result of connections between somatic and autonomic nervous system, so that pain may be perceived at a distant point of the body.	What is referred pain?
Where might acute cholecystitis (AKA inflammed gallbladder) cause referred pain?	It may cause pain in the right shoulder, because the autonomic nerves serving the gallbladder lie near the spinal cord, at the same anatomic level as the spinal sensory nerves that supply the skin of the shoulder.
It may cause pain in the right shoulder, because the autonomic nerves serving the gallbladder lie near the spinal cord, at the same anatomic level as the spinal sensory nerves that supply the skin of the shoulder.	Where might acute cholecystitis (AKA inflammed gallbladder) cause referred pain?
Where might appendicitis cause pain?	It causes pain in the right lower quadrant (direct), around the navel (referred), and rebounding pain (pain felt on the rebound after palpation)
It causes pain in the right lower quadrant (direct), around the navel (referred), and rebounding pain (pain felt on the rebound after palpation)	Where might appendicitis cause pain?
Where might an ulcer cause pain?	It might cause pain at the upper mid-abdoman or upper part of back.
It might cause pain at the upper mid-abdoman or upper part of back.	Where might an ulcer cause pain?
Where might diverticulitis cause pain?	It might cause pain in the lower left quadrant.
It might cause pain in the lower left quadrant.	Where might diverticulitis cause pain?
Where might an abdominal aortic aneurysm, A.K.A., an A.A.A., cause pain?	This condition might cause pain in the lower part of the back, or the lower quadrants.
This condition might cause pain in the lower part of the back, or the lower quadrants.	Where might an abdominal aortic aneurysm, A.K.A., an A.A.A., cause pain?
Where might cystitis, A.K.A.  inflamed bladder, cause pain?	It might cause pain in the lower mid-abdomen, or retropubic area.
It might cause pain in the lower mid-abdomen, or retropubic area.	Where might cystitis, A.K.A.  inflamed bladder, cause pain?
Where might a kidney infection cause pain?	It might cause pain in the costovertebral angle, which is the acute angle formed on either side of the human back between the twelfth rib and the vertebral column.
It might cause pain in the costovertebral angle, which is the acute angle formed on either side of the human back between the twelfth rib and the vertebral column.	Where might a kidney infection cause pain?
Where might kidney stones cause pain?	It might cause pain in the right or left flanks, radiating to the genitalia.
It might cause pain in the right or left flanks, radiating to the genitalia.	Where might kidney stones cause pain?
Where might pancreatitis cause pain?	It might cause pain in the upper abdomen (both quadrants) and the back.
It might cause pain in the upper abdomen (both quadrants) and the back.	Where might pancreatitis cause pain?
Where might pneumonia cause pain?	It might cause pain in the upper abdomen (referred pain).
It might cause pain in the upper abdomen (referred pain).	Where might pneumonia cause pain?
Where might a hernia cause pain?	It might cause pain anywhere in the abdominal area.
It might cause pain anywhere in the abdominal area.	Where might a hernia cause pain?
Where might peritonitis cause pain?	It might cause pain anywhere in the abdominal area.
It might cause pain anywhere in the abdominal area.	Where might peritonitis cause pain?
Why does early abdominal pain tend to be vague and poorly localized?	It tends to be vague and poorly localized because visceral peritoneum is usually irritated first.
It tends to be vague and poorly localized because visceral peritoneum is usually irritated first.	Why does early abdominal pain tend to be vague and poorly localized?
What is peptic ulcer disease (PUD)?	The protective layer is eroded, allowing the acid to eat into the organ itself over the course of weeks, months, or even years.
The protective layer is eroded, allowing the acid to eat into the organ itself over the course of weeks, months, or even years.	What is peptic ulcer disease (PUD)?
What causes most peptic ulcers?	Most are caused by an infection of the stomach with Heliocobacter pylori. Another major cause is chronic use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), as well as alcohol and smoking.
Most are caused by an infection of the stomach with Heliocobacter pylori. Another major cause is chronic use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), as well as alcohol and smoking.	What causes most peptic ulcers?
What do patients experience with peptic ulcers?	They experience a classic sequence of burning or gnawing pain in the stomach that subsides or diminishes immediately after eating and then reemerges 2 to 3 hours later.
They experience a classic sequence of burning or gnawing pain in the stomach that subsides or diminishes immediately after eating and then reemerges 2 to 3 hours later.	What do patients experience with peptic ulcers?
Where might a peptic ulcer cause pain?	It might cause pain in the upper abdomen, but sometimes may be found below the sternum.
It might cause pain in the upper abdomen, but sometimes may be found below the sternum.	Where might a peptic ulcer cause pain?
What are common symptoms of a peptic ulcer?	Nausea, vomiting, belching, and heartburn are common symptoms of it.
Nausea, vomiting, belching, and heartburn are common symptoms of it.	What are common symptoms of a peptic ulcer?
What are gallstones?	They form and block the outlet from the gallbladder, causing pain and inflammation.
They form and block the outlet from the gallbladder, causing pain and inflammation.	What are gallstones?
What is cholecystitis?	A condition in which the wall of the gallbladder becomes inflammed.
A condition in which the wall of the gallbladder becomes inflammed.	What is cholecystitis?
How does cholecystitis present?	The condition presents as a constant, severe pain in the right upper or midabdominal region, and may refer to the right upper back, shoulder area, or flank.
The condition presents as a constant, severe pain in the right upper or midabdominal region, and may refer to the right upper back, shoulder area, or flank.	How does cholecystitis present?
What are common symptoms of cholecystitis?	Symptoms include general gastrointestinal distress such as nausea and vomiting, indigestion, bloating, gas, and belching.
Symptoms include general gastrointestinal distress such as nausea and vomiting, indigestion, bloating, gas, and belching.	What are common symptoms of cholecystitis?
When does cholecystitis produce symptoms?	It commonly produces symptoms about 30 minutes after a particularly fatty meal and usually at night.
It commonly produces symptoms about 30 minutes after a particularly fatty meal and usually at night.	When does cholecystitis produce symptoms?
What causes pancreatitis?	It can be caused by an obstructing gallstone, alcohol abuse, and other diseases that cause inflammation of the pancreas.
It can be caused by an obstructing gallstone, alcohol abuse, and other diseases that cause inflammation of the pancreas.	What causes pancreatitis?
What is appendicitis?	It is inflammation or infection in the appendix.
It is inflammation or infection in the appendix.	What is appendicitis?
What are symptoms of appendicitis?	Symptoms are initially generalized and dull pain near the umbilical area. The pain later localizes to the right lower quadrant. A classic symptom is rebound tenderness.
Symptoms are initially generalized and dull pain near the umbilical area. The pain later localizes to the right lower quadrant. A classic symptom is rebound tenderness.	What are symptoms of appendicitis?
What is esophagitis?	It occurs when the lining of the esophagus becomes inflammed by infection or from the acids in the stomach (gastrophageal reflux disease).
It occurs when the lining of the esophagus becomes inflammed by infection or from the acids in the stomach (gastrophageal reflux disease).	What is esophagitis?
What causes esophageal varices?	They occur when the amount of pressure within the blood vessels surrounding esophagus increases.
They occur when the amount of pressure within the blood vessels surrounding esophagus increases.	What causes esophageal varices?
What causes Mallory-Weiss syndrome?	It occurs when the junction between the esophagus and the stomach tears, causing severe bleeding and eventually death.
It occurs when the junction between the esophagus and the stomach tears, causing severe bleeding and eventually death.	What causes Mallory-Weiss syndrome?
What is the principal symptom of Mallory-Weiss syndrome?	The principal syndrome is vomiting.
The principal syndrome is vomiting.	What is the principal symptom of Mallory-Weiss syndrome?
What is acute gastroenteritis?	It comprises a family of conditions revolving around a central theme of infection combined with diarrhea, nausea, and vomiting.
It comprises a family of conditions revolving around a central theme of infection combined with diarrhea, nausea, and vomiting.	What is acute gastroenteritis?
What causes diverticulitis?	It is caused when a lack of fiber leads to hard stool which requires more intestinal contractions, subsequently increasing pressure within the colon. In this environment, small defects within the colonic wall that would otherwise never pose a problem now fail, resulting in bulges in the wall. These small outcroppings eventually turn into pouches, called diverticula.
It is caused when a lack of fiber leads to hard stool which requires more intestinal contractions, subsequently increasing pressure within the colon. In this environment, small defects within the colonic wall that would otherwise never pose a problem now fail, resulting in bulges in the wall. These small outcroppings eventually turn into pouches, called diverticula.	What causes diverticulitis?
What are the symptoms of diverticulitis?	Symptoms are abdominal pain in the left side of the lower abdomen, fever, malaise, body aches, chills, nausea, and vomiting, as well as constipation.
Symptoms are abdominal pain in the left side of the lower abdomen, fever, malaise, body aches, chills, nausea, and vomiting, as well as constipation.	What are the symptoms of diverticulitis?
What is cystitis?	It is bladder infammation.
It is bladder infammation.	What is cystitis?
What is another name for cystitis?	Another name for it is urinary tract infection (UTI).
Another name for it is urinary tract infection (UTI).	What is another name for cystitis?
Where do patients with UTI tend to have pain?	They have pain in their lower abdominal quadrants.
They have pain in their lower abdominal quadrants.	Where do patients with UTI tend to have pain?
What is uremia?	It is when a patient's kidneys fail, and the patient loses the ability to excrete waste from the body, and the urea remains in the blood instead of going into the urine.
It is when a patient's kidneys fail, and the patient loses the ability to excrete waste from the body, and the urea remains in the blood instead of going into the urine.	What is uremia?
What is another name for kidney stones?	Renal Calculi is another name for it.
Renal Calculi is another name for it.	What is another name for kidney stones?
Can acute renal failure be reversed?	It can be reversed with prompt diagnosis and treatment.
It can be reversed with prompt diagnosis and treatment.	Can acute renal failure be reversed?
What should you always consider with a woman with lower quadrant pain or tenderness?	You should always consider that she may have a problem with her ovaries.
You should always consider that she may have a problem with her ovaries.	What should you always consider with a woman with lower quadrant pain or tenderness?
What is a cause of abdominal aoritc aneurysm (AAA)?	It is caused when in older people, the wall of the aorta develops weak areas that swell.
It is caused when in older people, the wall of the aorta develops weak areas that swell.	What is a cause of abdominal aoritc aneurysm (AAA)?
What is a common complaint of AAA?	Back pain is a common complaint with it.
Back pain is a common complaint with it.	What is a common complaint of AAA?
What is a hernia?	It is a protrusion of an organ or tissue through a hole or opening into a body cavity where it does not belong.
It is a protrusion of an organ or tissue through a hole or opening into a body cavity where it does not belong.	What is a hernia?
What causes hernia?	Causes of it include: A congenital defect, as around the umbilicus; a surgical wound that has failed to heal properly; a natural weakness in an area such as in the groin.
Causes of it include: A congenital defect, as around the umbilicus; a surgical wound that has failed to heal properly; a natural weakness in an area such as in the groin.	What causes hernia?
What is a reducible hernia?	It is a hernia that can disappear back into the body cavity in which it belongs.
It is a hernia that can disappear back into the body cavity in which it belongs.	What is a reducible hernia?
What is an incarcerated hernia?	It is a hernia that cannot be pushed back into the body cavity.
It is a hernia that cannot be pushed back into the body cavity.	What is an incarcerated hernia?
What is strangulation?	It is when a hernia is incarcerated, and its contents may become seriously compressed by the surrounding tissue, compromising the blood supply.
It is when a hernia is incarcerated, and its contents may become seriously compressed by the surrounding tissue, compromising the blood supply.	What is strangulation?
What is an important question to ask a patient with possible gastrointestinal issues regarding bleeding?	Ask them if they have blood in their vomit (hematemesis) or black, tarry stool (melena).
Ask them if they have blood in their vomit (hematemesis) or black, tarry stool (melena).	What is an important question to ask a patient with possible gastrointestinal issues regarding bleeding?
If a patient has drawn up their right knee, what condition might this be?	This stance may indicate appendicitis.
This stance may indicate appendicitis.	If a patient has drawn up their right knee, what condition might this be?
If a patient is curled up to one side, what condition may this be?	This stance may indicate pancreatitis.
This stance may indicate pancreatitis.	If a patient is curled up to one side, what condition may this be?
What is guarding?	It is a broadlike muscle spasm, and can be seen with major problems, such as a perforated ulcer or pancreatitis.
It is a broadlike muscle spasm, and can be seen with major problems, such as a perforated ulcer or pancreatitis.	What is guarding?
What is one way to decrease nausea?	Providing a patient low-flow oxygen often decreases it.
Providing a patient low-flow oxygen often decreases it.	What is one way to decrease nausea?
What happens if a patient misses a dialysis treatment?	If this happens, weakness and pulmonary edema can be the first in a series of conditions that can become progressively more serious.
If this happens, weakness and pulmonary edema can be the first in a series of conditions that can become progressively more serious.	What happens if a patient misses a dialysis treatment?
What are some adverse affects of dialysis?	They include hypotension, muscle cramps, nausea and vomiting, hemorrhage from the access site, and infection at the access site.
They include hypotension, muscle cramps, nausea and vomiting, hemorrhage from the access site, and infection at the access site.	What are some adverse affects of dialysis?
What is the endocrine system?	It is a complex message and control system that includes a network of glands that produce and secrete hormones.
What are endocrine glands?	They secrete and release chemicals that are used inside the body.
What is a hormone?	It is a substance produced by a gland that has special regulatory effects on other organs and tissues.
What is homeostasis?	It is the maintaining of stability in the body's internal environment.
What can cause endocrine disorders?	Hypersecretion or hyposecretion of a gland can cause it.
How much of the population does diabetes affect?	It affects about 7% of the population.
What is glucose?	It is one of the basic sugars used in the body and, in conjunction with oxygen, is the primary fuel for cellular metabolism. It is also called dextrose.
What is the full name of diabetes?	"Its full name is diabetes mellitus, which means ""sweet diabetes""."
What is type 1 diabetes?	When patients do not produce insulin. It typically developments during childhood.
What is type 2 diabetes?	When patients produce inadequate amounts of insulin, or what is produced does not function effectively. It is more common than type 1 diabetes, and on the rise due to obesity.
What are some medications that treat diabetes?	Chlorpropamide (Diabinese), tolbutamide (Orinase), glyburide (Micronase), glipizide (Glucotrol), metformin (Glucophage), and rosiglitazone (Avandia) are some of these types of muscles.
What kind of problem is type 1 diabetes considered?	It is considered an autoimmune problem, because the body becomes allergic to, and, therefore, destroys the insulin-producing cells of the endocrine glands in the pancreas.
What is the normal level of blood glucose levels?	The normal amount is 80 to 120 mg/dL
"What are the ""3 Ps"" of uncontrolled diabetes symptoms?"	They are polyuria (frequent urination), polydipsia (frequent drinking and thirst), and polyphagia (excessive eating).
What happens when the body can't use glucose to supply energy for cells?	When this happens, fat is used as an immediate energy source, which produces ketones and fatty acids as waste products and are hard for the body to excrete.
What is acidosis?	It is a condition caused by an accumulation of ketones in the blood and tissue.
What is diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA)?	It is a type of hyperglycemic crisis. It a form of acidosis seen in uncontrolled diabetes.
What are the signs and symptoms of DKA?	They are weakness, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, a weak and rapid pulse, and Kussmaul respirations
What are Kussmaul respirations?	They are a type of deep, rapid breathing seen during DKA.
What is often a result of type 2 diabetes?	A common result is HHNC, hyperosmolar hyperglycemic nonketotic coma.
How do diabetes lead to dehydration?	The body tries to get rid of the excess sugar in the urine. The fluid follows the sugar, causing dehydration.
What occurs with prolonged hyperglycemia?	It results in diabetic ketoacidosis.
What occurs with prolonged hypoglycemia?	It progresses to unresponsiveness and eventually hypoglycemic crisis.
What are common signs of both hyperglycemia or hypoglycemia?	Staggering and an intoxicated appearance or unresponsiveness are signs of both.
What is hyperglycemic crisis?	It is a state of unconsciousness resulting from several problems, including ketoacidosis, hyperglycemia, and dehydration.
What are some symptoms of hyperglycemic crisis?	"Some symptoms of Kussmaul respirations, dehydration, sweet or fruity odor on the breath, a rapid thready pulse, normal or slightly low blood pressure, weakness, nausea, and the ""3 Ps""."
What is a hypoglycemic crisis?	It occurs when the patient has taken too much insulin, not eaten enough food, or had an unusual amount of physical activity.
What are the symptoms of hypoglycemia?	Symptoms include normal to shallow or rapid respirations, pale clammy skin, sweating, a rapid pulse, normal to low blood pressure, anxious or combative behavior, hunger, weakness on one side of the body, and rapid changes in mental status.
How many grams of glucose does one tube contain?	It contains 15 grams of glucose.
What are the contraindications to oral glucose?	They are an inability to swallow and unconsciousness, because aspiration can occur.
What is hematology?	It is the study and prevention of blood-related diseases.
What percentage of blood volume is red blood cells (erythrocytes)?	47% in males and 42% in females is made up of it.
What is the scientific term for white blood cells?	They are also called leukocytes.
What is sickle cell disease?	It is an inherited blood disorder that affect the red blood cells. The cells are poor oxygen carriers, so patients may experience hypoxia.
How often do normal red blood cells live compared to hemoglobin S in sickle cell disease?	Normal red blood cells live about 120 days. Hemoglobin S cells live only 16 days.
What is thrombosis?	The development of a blood clot.
What is thrombophilia?	It is the tendancy to develop blood clots, and affects approximately 5% to 7% of the Caucasian population of European descent in the United States.
What is hemophilia?	It is a genetic disorder usually inherited from the mother, in which the blood is not able to control bleeding. It occurs mostly in males, in approximately 1 in every 5 to 10 thousand births.
How many Americans die of allergic reactions every year?	At least 1,000 Americans die every year.
What is immunology?	It is the study of the body's immune system.
What is the immune system?	It is the system that protects the human body from substances and organisms that are foreign to the body.
It is the system that protects the human body from substances and organisms that are foreign to the body.	What is the immune system?
What is an allergic reaction?	It is an exaggerated immune response. It is a reaction by the body's immune system, which releases chemicals to combat the stimulus.
It is an exaggerated immune response. It is a reaction by the body's immune system, which releases chemicals to combat the stimulus.	What is an allergic reaction?
What are some chemicals released by the immune system?	Histamine and leukotrienes are two of them.
Histamine and leukotrienes are two of them.	What are some chemicals released by the immune system?
What is anaphylaxis?	It is an extreme allergic reaction that is life threatening and involves multiple organ systems.
It is an extreme allergic reaction that is life threatening and involves multiple organ systems.	What is anaphylaxis?
What is one of the most common signs of anaphylaxis?	Wheezing is one of the most common signs of it.
Wheezing is one of the most common signs of it.	What is one of the most common signs of anaphylaxis?
What is urticaria?	It consists of smalls areas of generalized itching or burning that appear as multiple, small, raised areas on the skin.
It consists of smalls areas of generalized itching or burning that appear as multiple, small, raised areas on the skin.	What is urticaria?
What is envenomation?	It is when an insect or animal bites you and injects the bite with its venom.
It is when an insect or animal bites you and injects the bite with its venom.	What is envenomation?
What are five general catagories of allergens?	Insect bites and stings, medications, plants, food, and chemicals.
Insect bites and stings, medications, plants, food, and chemicals.	What are five general catagories of allergens?
How many species of bees, wasps, and hornets are there?	There are more than 100,000 species of them.
There are more than 100,000 species of them.	How many species of bees, wasps, and hornets are there?
What is a wheal?	It is a raised, swollen, well-defined area of the skin.
It is a raised, swollen, well-defined area of the skin.	What is a wheal?
What is a special consideration for honeybee stings?	Their stingers remain in the wound for up to 20 minutes and continue to inject venom.
Their stingers remain in the wound for up to 20 minutes and continue to inject venom.	What is a special consideration for honeybee stings?
What are some actions you should take with insect stings?	Position the injection site slightly below the level of the heart, and apply ice or cold packs to the area, but not directly on the skin. Don't use tweezers to remove the barb as squeezing it might release more venom.
Position the injection site slightly below the level of the heart, and apply ice or cold packs to the area, but not directly on the skin. Don't use tweezers to remove the barb as squeezing it might release more venom.	What are some actions you should take with insect stings?
What position should you place an insect sting position in?	Place them in the shock position, and give oxygen if needed.
Place them in the shock position, and give oxygen if needed.	What position should you place an insect sting position in?
What percentage of the population are allergic to the venom of the bee, hornet, yellow jacket, and wasp?	Approximately 5% are allergic.
Approximately 5% are allergic.	What percentage of the population are allergic to the venom of the bee, hornet, yellow jacket, and wasp?
How many people die each year from reactions to stings?	About 200 people a year die from this.
About 200 people a year die from this.	How many people die each year from reactions to stings?
What are some common symptoms of an anaphylactic reaction to stings?	Patients may experience generalized itching and burning, widespread urticaria, wheals, swelling about the lips and tongue, bronchospasm and wheezing, chest tightness and coughing, dyspnea, anxiety, abdominal cramps, and hypotension.
Patients may experience generalized itching and burning, widespread urticaria, wheals, swelling about the lips and tongue, bronchospasm and wheezing, chest tightness and coughing, dyspnea, anxiety, abdominal cramps, and hypotension.	What are some common symptoms of an anaphylactic reaction to stings?
When do most terminal anaphylactic patients die?	Two-thirds of them die within the first half hour, so speed is essential.
Two-thirds of them die within the first half hour, so speed is essential.	When do most terminal anaphylactic patients die?
What is the definitive treatment for anaphylactic shock?	It is epinephrine.
It is epinephrine.	What is the definitive treatment for anaphylactic shock?
What is stridor?	It is a harsh, high-pitched inspiratory sound, and occurs when swelling in the upper airway (near the vocal cords and throat) closes off the airway and can eventually lead to total obstruction.
It is a harsh, high-pitched inspiratory sound, and occurs when swelling in the upper airway (near the vocal cords and throat) closes off the airway and can eventually lead to total obstruction.	What is stridor?
What vital signs should you assess and reassess during reassessment?	Pulse, respirations, blood pressure, skin, pupils, and oxygen saturation.
Pulse, respirations, blood pressure, skin, pupils, and oxygen saturation.	What vital signs should you assess and reassess during reassessment?
What is a useful method for assessing an allergic patient's perfusion status?	Pulse oximetry is a useful method for this.
Pulse oximetry is a useful method for this.	What is a useful method for assessing an allergic patient's perfusion status?
What kind of chemical is epinephrine?	It is a sympathomimetic, which means it mimics the sympathetic (flight or fight) response.
It is a sympathomimetic, which means it mimics the sympathetic (flight or fight) response.	What kind of chemical is epinephrine?
How does epinephrine work?	It has various properties that cause the blood vessels to constrict, which reverses vasodilation and hypotension. This, in turn, elevates the diastolic pressure and improves coronary blood flow. It also increases cardiac contractility and relieves bronchospasm in the lungs.
It has various properties that cause the blood vessels to constrict, which reverses vasodilation and hypotension. This, in turn, elevates the diastolic pressure and improves coronary blood flow. It also increases cardiac contractility and relieves bronchospasm in the lungs.	How does epinephrine work?
How much epinephrine do auto-injectable syringes contain?	The adult EpiPen system delivers 0.3 mg of  it via an automatic needle and syringe system; the infant-child system delivers 0.15 mg. The Twinject auto-injector contains two doses of it and is also available in two strengths, 0.15 mg for those weighing 33 to 66 lbs., and 0.3 mg for those who weigh 66 lbs. or more.
The adult EpiPen system delivers 0.3 mg of  it via an automatic needle and syringe system; the infant-child system delivers 0.15 mg. The Twinject auto-injector contains two doses of it and is also available in two strengths, 0.15 mg for those weighing 33 to 66 lbs., and 0.3 mg for those who weigh 66 lbs. or more.	How much epinephrine do auto-injectable syringes contain?
What are antihistamines?	These are agents that block the effect of histamines. They work relatively slowly, within several minutes to 1 hour.
These are agents that block the effect of histamines. They work relatively slowly, within several minutes to 1 hour.	What are antihistamines?
What is one thing you should do with all patients with suspected anaphylaxis?	They should be given high-flow, high-concentration oxygen.
They should be given high-flow, high-concentration oxygen.	What is one thing you should do with all patients with suspected anaphylaxis?
What are some common signs and symptoms of allergic reactions regarding the respiratory system?	They are shortness of breath (dyspnea), sneezing or an itchy runny nose, tightness in the throat or chest, irritating dry cough, hoarseness, respirations that become rapid, labored, or noisey, and wheezing and/or stridor (progressing to a silent chest with anaphylaxis).
They are shortness of breath (dyspnea), sneezing or an itchy runny nose, tightness in the throat or chest, irritating dry cough, hoarseness, respirations that become rapid, labored, or noisey, and wheezing and/or stridor (progressing to a silent chest with anaphylaxis).	What are some common signs and symptoms of allergic reactions regarding the respiratory system?
What are some common signs and symptoms of allergic reactions regarding the cardiovascular system?	They are a decrease in blood pressure as blood vessels dilate (hypotension), an increase in pulse rate (tachycardia), pale skin as the vascular system fails, and loss of consciousness and coma.
They are a decrease in blood pressure as blood vessels dilate (hypotension), an increase in pulse rate (tachycardia), pale skin as the vascular system fails, and loss of consciousness and coma.	What are some common signs and symptoms of allergic reactions regarding the cardiovascular system?
What are some common signs and symptoms of allergic reactions regarding the skin?	They are flushing, itching, or burning skin, especially common over the face and upper part of the chest, urticaria over large areas of the body (internal or external), swelling (especially of the face, neck, hands, feet, and or tongue), swelling and cyanosis or pallor around the lips, and a warm, tingling feeling in the face, mouth, chest, feet, and hands.
They are flushing, itching, or burning skin, especially common over the face and upper part of the chest, urticaria over large areas of the body (internal or external), swelling (especially of the face, neck, hands, feet, and or tongue), swelling and cyanosis or pallor around the lips, and a warm, tingling feeling in the face, mouth, chest, feet, and hands.	What are some common signs and symptoms of allergic reactions regarding the skin?
What are some additional common signs and symptoms of allergic reactions?	They are anxiety, abdominal cramps, headache, itchy, watery eyes, dizziness, and a decreasing mental status.
They are anxiety, abdominal cramps, headache, itchy, watery eyes, dizziness, and a decreasing mental status.	What are some additional common signs and symptoms of allergic reactions?
How many children and adult suffer acute poisoning each year?	Approximately 5 million each year suffer from this.
Approximately 5 million each year suffer from this.	How many children and adult suffer acute poisoning each year?
What are opoids?	They are medicines with actions similar to morphine.
They are medicines with actions similar to morphine.	What are opoids?
What is toxicology?	It is the study of toxic or poisonous substances.
It is the study of toxic or poisonous substances.	What is toxicology?
What is a poison?	It is any substance whose chemical action can damage body structures or impair body function.
It is any substance whose chemical action can damage body structures or impair body function.	What is a poison?
What is substance abuse?	It is the misuse of any substance to produce a desired effect.
It is the misuse of any substance to produce a desired effect.	What is substance abuse?
What is overdose?	It is when a patient takes a toxic dose of a drug.
It is when a patient takes a toxic dose of a drug.	What is overdose?
What should you do if you have even the slightest suspicion that a patient has taken a poisonous substance?	If you suspect this, you should notify medical control and begin emergency treatment at once.
If you suspect this, you should notify medical control and begin emergency treatment at once.	What should you do if you have even the slightest suspicion that a patient has taken a poisonous substance?
What does the presence of injuries such as burning or blistering around the mouth suggest?	It strongly suggests the ingestion of a poison, such as lye.
It strongly suggests the ingestion of a poison, such as lye.	What does the presence of injuries such as burning or blistering around the mouth suggest?
What are some questions you can ask a patient you think might have ingested poison?	"In this case, you can ask: ""What substances did you take? When did you take it/ were you exposed to it? How much did you ingest? What actions have been taken? How much do you weigh?"""
"In this case, you can ask: ""What substances did you take? When did you take it/ were you exposed to it? How much did you ingest? What actions have been taken? How much do you weigh?"""	What are some questions you can ask a patient you think might have ingested poison?
What should you do if a possibly poisoned patient vomits in the ambulance?	If this occurs, you should try to collect the vomitus in a separate plastic bag so that it can be analyzed at the hospital.
If this occurs, you should try to collect the vomitus in a separate plastic bag so that it can be analyzed at the hospital.	What should you do if a possibly poisoned patient vomits in the ambulance?
What is the telephone number for the Poison Help hotline?	The number is 1(800) 222.1222.
The number is 1(800) 222.1222.	What is the telephone number for the Poison Help hotline?
What should you do if you believe that a patient has been poisoned?	If you think this has happened, you should immediately provide the poison center with all relevant information.
If you think this has happened, you should immediately provide the poison center with all relevant information.	What should you do if you believe that a patient has been poisoned?
In general, what is the most important treatment you can perform for a patient you believed poisoned?	In this situation, the most important treatment you can perform in general is to dilute and/or physically remove the poisonous agent.
In this situation, the most important treatment you can perform in general is to dilute and/or physically remove the poisonous agent.	In general, what is the most important treatment you can perform for a patient you believed poisoned?
What are the four avenues through which poison can get into a patient's body?	They are: Inhalation, absorption (surface contact), ingestion, and injection
They are: Inhalation, absorption (surface contact), ingestion, and injection	What are the four avenues through which poison can get into a patient's body?
What are some examples of inhaled poisons?	Some examples are natural gas, sewer gas, certain pesticides, carbon monoxide, chlorine, and other gases.
Some examples are natural gas, sewer gas, certain pesticides, carbon monoxide, chlorine, and other gases.	What are some examples of inhaled poisons?
What might have to happen if the patient is found inside a toxic environment?	In this case, patients may need to be decontaminated by specially trained personnel after they are removed from the environment. The patient's clothing should be removed in this process because it may contain trapped gases that can be released. You cannot administer emergency care until this step has been completed and there is no danger of the poison contaminating you.
In this case, patients may need to be decontaminated by specially trained personnel after they are removed from the environment. The patient's clothing should be removed in this process because it may contain trapped gases that can be released. You cannot administer emergency care until this step has been completed and there is no danger of the poison contaminating you.	What might have to happen if the patient is found inside a toxic environment?
What are some signs and symptoms of inhalation of chlorine or other irritant toxics?	Symptoms of this include: burning eyes, sore throat, cough, chest pain, hoarseness, wheezing, respiratory distress, dizziness, confusion, headache, or stridor in severe cases. The patient may also have seizures or an altered mental status.
Symptoms of this include: burning eyes, sore throat, cough, chest pain, hoarseness, wheezing, respiratory distress, dizziness, confusion, headache, or stridor in severe cases. The patient may also have seizures or an altered mental status.	What are some signs and symptoms of inhalation of chlorine or other irritant toxics?
What are some products that are very destructive on contact?	Acids, alkalis, and some petroleum (hydrocarbon) products are very destructive.
Acids, alkalis, and some petroleum (hydrocarbon) products are very destructive.	What are some products that are very destructive on contact?
What should you do when a large amount of material has been spilled in the eyes?	In this case, flooding the eyes for at least 20 minutes may be the fastest and most effective treatment.
In this case, flooding the eyes for at least 20 minutes may be the fastest and most effective treatment.	What should you do when a large amount of material has been spilled in the eyes?
What should you not do to chemical burns?	In this case, do not spend time trying to neutralize substances on the skin with additional chemicals. This action may actually be more harmful.
In this case, do not spend time trying to neutralize substances on the skin with additional chemicals. This action may actually be more harmful.	What should you not do to chemical burns?
What should you do if you suspect that toxic or hazardous materials are present?	In this case, you should call for specialized resources such as the Hazardous Materials Team.
In this case, you should call for specialized resources such as the Hazardous Materials Team.	What should you do if you suspect that toxic or hazardous materials are present?
When should you not irrigate the contact area with water?	When a patient has been contaminated with a poison that reacts violently to water, such as phosphorus or elemental sodium. Instead, brush the chemical off the patient, remove contaminated clothing, and apply a dry dressing to the burn area.
When a patient has been contaminated with a poison that reacts violently to water, such as phosphorus or elemental sodium. Instead, brush the chemical off the patient, remove contaminated clothing, and apply a dry dressing to the burn area.	When should you not irrigate the contact area with water?
What percentage of all poisonings are by mouth?	Approximately 80% are through ingestion.
Approximately 80% are through ingestion.	What percentage of all poisonings are by mouth?
In the event of gastrointestinal poisoning, what is an EMT's goal?	In such an event, an EMT's goal is to remove as much of the poison as possible from the gastrointestinal tract.
In such an event, an EMT's goal is to remove as much of the poison as possible from the gastrointestinal tract.	In the event of gastrointestinal poisoning, what is an EMT's goal?
Why are injected poisons so dangerous?	They are so dangerous because they are impossible to dilute or remove as they are usually absorbed quickly into the body or cause intense local tissue destruction.
They are so dangerous because they are impossible to dilute or remove as they are usually absorbed quickly into the body or cause intense local tissue destruction.	Why are injected poisons so dangerous?
What is tolerance?	When a person who routinely uses a substance needs increasing amounts of it to achieve the same result.
When a person who routinely uses a substance needs increasing amounts of it to achieve the same result.	What is tolerance?
What are some signs and symptoms of opiods?	Some examples are hypoventilation or respiratory arrest, pinpoint pupils, sedation or coma, and hypotension.
Some examples are hypoventilation or respiratory arrest, pinpoint pupils, sedation or coma, and hypotension.	What are some signs and symptoms of opiods?
What are some signs and symptoms of sympathomimetics?	Some symptoms are hypertension, tachycardia, dilated pupils, agitation or seizures, and hyperthermia.
Some symptoms are hypertension, tachycardia, dilated pupils, agitation or seizures, and hyperthermia.	What are some signs and symptoms of sympathomimetics?
What are some signs and symptoms of sedative-hypnotics?	Some examples are slurred speech, sedation or coma, hypoventilation, hypotension.
Some examples are slurred speech, sedation or coma, hypoventilation, hypotension.	What are some signs and symptoms of sedative-hypnotics?
What are some signs and symptoms of anticholinergics?	Some examples are tachycardia, hyperthermia, hypertension, dilated pupils, dry skin and mucous membranes, sedation, agitation, seizures, coma, or delirium, and decreased bowel sounds.
Some examples are tachycardia, hyperthermia, hypertension, dilated pupils, dry skin and mucous membranes, sedation, agitation, seizures, coma, or delirium, and decreased bowel sounds.	What are some signs and symptoms of anticholinergics?
What are some signs and symptoms of cholinergics?	Some examples are excess defecation or urination, muscle fasciculations, pinpoint pupils, excess lacrimation or salivation, airway compromise, nausea or vomiting.
Some examples are excess defecation or urination, muscle fasciculations, pinpoint pupils, excess lacrimation or salivation, airway compromise, nausea or vomiting.	What are some signs and symptoms of cholinergics?
How many people dies from alcohol every year?	200,000 people die from this each year.
200,000 people die from this each year.	How many people dies from alcohol every year?
What is the most common long-term effect of alcohol consumption?	It is liver damage, with estimates that up to 90% of heavy drinkers will develop some level of hepatitis and 10% to 20% will develop cirrhosis. Atrophy of the cerebrum is another long-term effect.
It is liver damage, with estimates that up to 90% of heavy drinkers will develop some level of hepatitis and 10% to 20% will develop cirrhosis. Atrophy of the cerebrum is another long-term effect.	What is the most common long-term effect of alcohol consumption?
What is alcohol?	It is a powerful Central Nervous System (CNS) depressant, a sedative, and a hypnotic (it induces sleep).
It is a powerful Central Nervous System (CNS) depressant, a sedative, and a hypnotic (it induces sleep).	What is alcohol?
What happens to a patient experiencing alcohol withdrawal?	They may experience hallucinations or delirium tremens (DTs), which may develop 1 to 7 days after a person stops drinking.
They may experience hallucinations or delirium tremens (DTs), which may develop 1 to 7 days after a person stops drinking.	What happens to a patient experiencing alcohol withdrawal?
What are some symptoms of alcohol withdrawal besides DTs?	They are agitation and restlessness, fever, sweating, tremors, confusion and/or disorientation, delusions, and seizures.
They are agitation and restlessness, fever, sweating, tremors, confusion and/or disorientation, delusions, and seizures.	What are some symptoms of alcohol withdrawal besides DTs?
What is a trade name of hydrocodone?	Vicondin
Vicondin	What is a trade name of hydrocodone?
What is a trade name of hydromorphone?	Dilaudid
Dilaudid	What is a trade name of hydromorphone?
What is a trade name of meperidine?	Demerol
Demerol	What is a trade name of meperidine?
What is a trade name of methadone?	Dolophine
Dolophine	What is a trade name of methadone?
What is a trade name of oxycodone?	Percocet
Percocet	What is a trade name of oxycodone?
What is a trade name of oxycodone hydrochloride?	OxyContin
OxyContin	What is a trade name of oxycodone hydrochloride?
What are signs and symptoms of opiod patients?	They are sedated or unconscious, cyanotic, and (most telling) pinpoint pupils.
They are sedated or unconscious, cyanotic, and (most telling) pinpoint pupils.	What are signs and symptoms of opiod patients?
What treatment should EMTs provide to opioid paitent?	Treatment includes supporting the airway and breathing. You may try to arouse patients by talking loudly to them or shaking them gently. Always open the airway, give supplemental oxygen, and be prepared for vomiting.
Treatment includes supporting the airway and breathing. You may try to arouse patients by talking loudly to them or shaking them gently. Always open the airway, give supplemental oxygen, and be prepared for vomiting.	What treatment should EMTs provide to opioid paitent?
What position should you put opioid patients in?	In this situation, place them in the supine position; this will help compensate for likely hypotension.
In this situation, place them in the supine position; this will help compensate for likely hypotension.	What position should you put opioid patients in?
What should you NOT attempt to do with opioid patients?	In this situation, do NOT use home remedies, such as forcing milk or applying ice to the groin.
In this situation, do NOT use home remedies, such as forcing milk or applying ice to the groin.	What should you NOT attempt to do with opioid patients?
How quickly with naloxone (Narcan) work?	It will work within two minutes.
It will work within two minutes.	How quickly with naloxone (Narcan) work?
What is the only effective antidote to reverse the symptoms of opioid overdose?	The only one are certain narcotic antagonists such as naloxone (Narcan).
The only one are certain narcotic antagonists such as naloxone (Narcan).	What is the only effective antidote to reverse the symptoms of opioid overdose?
"What is an example ""date-rape"", ""knock out"", or ""Mickey Finn"" drugs?"	One example is flunitrazepam (Rohypnol).
One example is flunitrazepam (Rohypnol).	"What is an example ""date-rape"", ""knock out"", or ""Mickey Finn"" drugs?"
What is a trade name for phenobarbital?	Luminal
Luminal	What is a trade name for phenobarbital?
What is a trade name alprazolam?	Xanax
Xanax	What is a trade name alprazolam?
What is the trade name of diazepam?	Valium
Valium	What is the trade name of diazepam?
What is a trade name of flunitrazepam?	Rohypnol
Rohypnol	What is a trade name of flunitrazepam?
What is a trade name of lorazepam?	Ativan
Ativan	What is a trade name of lorazepam?
What is a trade name of carisoprodol	Soma
Soma	What is a trade name of carisoprodol
What is a trade name of chloral hydrate?	"""Mickey Finn"""
"""Mickey Finn"""	What is a trade name of chloral hydrate?
What is ethyl alcohol?	This is drinking alcohol.
This is drinking alcohol.	What is ethyl alcohol?
What is isopropyl alcohol?	This is rubbing alcohol.
This is rubbing alcohol.	What is isopropyl alcohol?
What is an important precaution when dealing with patients who inhaled halogenated hydrocarbon solvents?	Patients who have used these have hearts that are hypersensative to the patient's own adrenaline, putting the patient at high risk for sudden cardiac death because of ventricular fibrillation; even the action of walking may release enough adrenaline to cause a fatal ventricular arrhythmia.
Patients who have used these have hearts that are hypersensative to the patient's own adrenaline, putting the patient at high risk for sudden cardiac death because of ventricular fibrillation; even the action of walking may release enough adrenaline to cause a fatal ventricular arrhythmia.	What is an important precaution when dealing with patients who inhaled halogenated hydrocarbon solvents?
What is a stimulant?	It is an agent that produces an excited state.
It is an agent that produces an excited state.	What is a stimulant?
What are cholinergic agents?	These agents overstimulate normal body functions that are controlled by the parasympathetic nerves, resulting in salivation, mucous secretion, urination, crying, and an abnormal heart rate.
These agents overstimulate normal body functions that are controlled by the parasympathetic nerves, resulting in salivation, mucous secretion, urination, crying, and an abnormal heart rate.	What are cholinergic agents?
What does DUMBELS stand for?	Defecation Urination Miosis (constriction of the pupils) Bronchorrhea (discharge of mucus from the lungs) Emesis Lacrimation Salivation
Defecation Urination Miosis (constriction of the pupils) Bronchorrhea (discharge of mucus from the lungs) Emesis Lacrimation Salivation	What does DUMBELS stand for?
What is the most important consideration in caring for a patient who has been exposed to an organophosphate insecticide or some other cholinergic agent.	The most important consideration is to avoid exposure yourself.
The most important consideration is to avoid exposure yourself.	What is the most important consideration in caring for a patient who has been exposed to an organophosphate insecticide or some other cholinergic agent.
What are the most common antidotes to nerve agents?	They are the Mark I kit and the DuoDote kit. The kits consist of an auto-injector of atropine and one of 2-PAM chloride (pralidoxime chloride).
They are the Mark I kit and the DuoDote kit. The kits consist of an auto-injector of atropine and one of 2-PAM chloride (pralidoxime chloride).	What are the most common antidotes to nerve agents?
What is a trade name for phenothiazines?	Thorazine
Thorazine	What is a trade name for phenothiazines?
What is a trade name for tetrahydrozoline?	Visine
Visine	What is a trade name for tetrahydrozoline?
What are the two types of food poisoning?	One type, the organism causes disease; in the other type, the organism produces toxins that cause disease
One type, the organism causes disease; in the other type, the organism produces toxins that cause disease	What are the two types of food poisoning?
What is Salmonella?	It is an organism that produces directs effects of food poisoning. It is characterized by severe gastrointestinal symptoms within 72 hours of ingestion, including nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, and diarrhea.
It is an organism that produces directs effects of food poisoning. It is characterized by severe gastrointestinal symptoms within 72 hours of ingestion, including nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, and diarrhea.	What is Salmonella?
What is Staphylococcus?	It is a bacteria that is quick to grow and produce toxins in foods that have been prepared in advance and kept too long, even in the refrigerator. It results in sudden gastrointestinal symptoms, including nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. Symptoms usually start within 2 to 3 hours after ingestion, up to 8 to 12 hours.
It is a bacteria that is quick to grow and produce toxins in foods that have been prepared in advance and kept too long, even in the refrigerator. It results in sudden gastrointestinal symptoms, including nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. Symptoms usually start within 2 to 3 hours after ingestion, up to 8 to 12 hours.	What is Staphylococcus?
What is one of the most severe forms of food poisoning?	It is botulism, which results from eating improperly canned food, in which spores of Clostridium bacteria have grown and produced a toxin.
It is botulism, which results from eating improperly canned food, in which spores of Clostridium bacteria have grown and produced a toxin.	What is one of the most severe forms of food poisoning?
What are the symptoms of botulism?	They are neurologic: blurring of vision, weakness, and difficulty in speaking and breathing. It can also cause muscle paralysis and is typically fatal once it reaches respiratory muscles.
They are neurologic: blurring of vision, weakness, and difficulty in speaking and breathing. It can also cause muscle paralysis and is typically fatal once it reaches respiratory muscles.	What are the symptoms of botulism?
When do symptoms of botulism first develop?	They develop as long as 4 days after ingestion, or as early as the first 24 hours.
They develop as long as 4 days after ingestion, or as early as the first 24 hours.	When do symptoms of botulism first develop?
How many caes of poisoning from plants occur each year?	Several thousand cases of this occur each year.
Several thousand cases of this occur each year.	How many caes of poisoning from plants occur each year?
What is the scientific name for hemlock?	Conium maculatum
Conium maculatum	What is the scientific name for hemlock?
What is the scientific name for lily of the valley?	convallaria majalis
convallaria majalis	What is the scientific name for lily of the valley?
What is the scientific name for oleander?	Nerium oleander
Nerium oleander	What is the scientific name for oleander?
What is the scientific name for mistletoe?	Phoradendron
Phoradendron	What is the scientific name for mistletoe?
What is another name for azalea?	Rhododendron
Rhododendron	What is another name for azalea?
What is the scientific name for nightshade?	Solarium nigrum
Solarium nigrum	What is the scientific name for nightshade?
What is the emergency treatment of diffenbachia?	This includes maintaining an open airway, giving oxygen, and transporting the patient promptly to the hospital for respiratory support.
This includes maintaining an open airway, giving oxygen, and transporting the patient promptly to the hospital for respiratory support.	What is the emergency treatment of diffenbachia?
What is dieffenbachia?	"This is also called ""dumbcane"". It causes irritation of skin and mucous membranes. When chewed, a single leaf (""elephant ears"") may irritate the lining of the upper airway."
"This is also called ""dumbcane"". It causes irritation of skin and mucous membranes. When chewed, a single leaf (""elephant ears"") may irritate the lining of the upper airway."	What is dieffenbachia?
What is the third leading cause of death in the States?	It is stroke, after heart disease and cancer.
It is stroke, after heart disease and cancer.	What is the third leading cause of death in the States?
What are the statistics regarding gender and strokes?	Men have more, but they are more likely to be fatal in women.
Men have more, but they are more likely to be fatal in women.	What are the statistics regarding gender and strokes?
What ethnicities have a higher risk for stroke?	African Americans, Hispanics, and Asians have a higher risk for this.
African Americans, Hispanics, and Asians have a higher risk for this.	What ethnicities have a higher risk for stroke?
What are some of the causes of seizures?	They may occur as a result of a recent or an old head injury, a brain tumor, a metabolic problem, or simply a genetic disposition.
They may occur as a result of a recent or an old head injury, a brain tumor, a metabolic problem, or simply a genetic disposition.	What are some of the causes of seizures?
What does A.M.S. stand for?	It stands for Altered Mental Status.
It stands for Altered Mental Status.	What does A.M.S. stand for?
What are some possible causes of AMS?	Some possible causes are intoxication, head injury, hypoxia, stroke, metabolic disturbances, among others.
Some possible causes are intoxication, head injury, hypoxia, stroke, metabolic disturbances, among others.	What are some possible causes of AMS?
What does TIA stand for?	It stands for Transient Ischemic Attack.
It stands for Transient Ischemic Attack.	What does TIA stand for?
What are the 3 major parts of the brain?	The cerebrum, the cerebellum, and the brain stem.
The cerebrum, the cerebellum, and the brain stem.	What are the 3 major parts of the brain?
What does the brain stem control?	It controls the most basic functions of the body, such as breathing, blood pressure, swallowing, and pupil constriction.
It controls the most basic functions of the body, such as breathing, blood pressure, swallowing, and pupil constriction.	What does the brain stem control?
What does the cerebellum control?	It controls muscle and body coordination.
It controls muscle and body coordination.	What does the cerebellum control?
How many cerebrum hemispheres are there, and what do they do?	There are two, and they each control the opposite side of the body.
There are two, and they each control the opposite side of the body.	How many cerebrum hemispheres are there, and what do they do?
What does the front part of the cerebrum control?	It controls emotion and thought.
It controls emotion and thought.	What does the front part of the cerebrum control?
What does the middle part of the cerebrum control?	It controls touch and movement.
It controls touch and movement.	What does the middle part of the cerebrum control?
What does the back part of the cerebrum control?	It controls sight.
It controls sight.	What does the back part of the cerebrum control?
How many cranial nerves are there?	There are twelve, running to the eyes, ears, nose, and face.
There are twelve, running to the eyes, ears, nose, and face.	How many cranial nerves are there?
Where and what are spinal nerves?	They are located at each vertebra, and branch out from the spinal cord and carry signals to and from the body.
They are located at each vertebra, and branch out from the spinal cord and carry signals to and from the body.	Where and what are spinal nerves?
What is a possible sign that the primary problem of a patient is in the brain?	If the patient has signs and symptoms affecting only one side of the body, it may be because of this.
If the patient has signs and symptoms affecting only one side of the body, it may be because of this.	What is a possible sign that the primary problem of a patient is in the brain?
How do the brain and skull feel pain?	They do not actually sense pain because neither contains pain receptors.
They do not actually sense pain because neither contains pain receptors.	How do the brain and skull feel pain?
What are meninges?	They are membranes that cover the brain and spinal cord.
They are membranes that cover the brain and spinal cord.	What are meninges?
What are some possible life-threatening causes of headaches?	They can be caused by a stroke, tumor, infection of the central nervous system, or hypertension.
They can be caused by a stroke, tumor, infection of the central nervous system, or hypertension.	What are some possible life-threatening causes of headaches?
What might a situation with more than one patient reporting a headache tell you?	It might signify carbon monoxide.
It might signify carbon monoxide.	What might a situation with more than one patient reporting a headache tell you?
What is the most common type of headache?	Tension headaches are the most common types.
Tension headaches are the most common types.	What is the most common type of headache?
What causes tension headaches?	They are caused by muscle contractions in the head and neck are attributed to stress.
They are caused by muscle contractions in the head and neck are attributed to stress.	What causes tension headaches?
What is the second most common type of headache?	Migraine headaches are the second most common.
Migraine headaches are the second most common.	What is the second most common type of headache?
What causes migraines?	They are caused by changes in the blood vessel size in the base of the brain.
They are caused by changes in the blood vessel size in the base of the brain.	What causes migraines?
What causes sinus headaches?	They are caused by pressure that is the result of fluid accumulation in the sinus cavities.
They are caused by pressure that is the result of fluid accumulation in the sinus cavities.	What causes sinus headaches?
What is a possible sign of a hemorrhagic stroke?	A sudden, severe headache, often described as the worst pain the patient has ever had.
A sudden, severe headache, often described as the worst pain the patient has ever had.	What is a possible sign of a hemorrhagic stroke?
What causes the pain in a hemorrhagic stroke?	The blood from a ruptured blood vessel irritates the tissues of the brain and can cause increased intracranial pressure, resulting in this.
The blood from a ruptured blood vessel irritates the tissues of the brain and can cause increased intracranial pressure, resulting in this.	What causes the pain in a hemorrhagic stroke?
What are some signs of increased intracranial pressure?	They are headache, vomiting, AMS, and seizures.
They are headache, vomiting, AMS, and seizures.	What are some signs of increased intracranial pressure?
What is bacterial meningitis?	It is an inflammation of the meninges caused by a bacterial infection, and is a central nervous system infection in which the patient may complain of a headache, stiff neck, fever, and sensitivity to light.
It is an inflammation of the meninges caused by a bacterial infection, and is a central nervous system infection in which the patient may complain of a headache, stiff neck, fever, and sensitivity to light.	What is bacterial meningitis?
What is another name for a stroke?	Another name for it is a cerebrovascular accident (CVA).
Another name for it is a cerebrovascular accident (CVA).	What is another name for a stroke?
What is a CVA?	It is an interruption of blood flow to the brain that results in the loss of brain function.
It is an interruption of blood flow to the brain that results in the loss of brain function.	What is a CVA?
What is ischemia?	It is a lack of oxygen that causes the cells not to function properly.
It is a lack of oxygen that causes the cells not to function properly.	What is ischemia?
What are the two types of strokes?	The two types are ischemic and hemorrhagic.
The two types are ischemic and hemorrhagic.	What are the two types of strokes?
What causes an ischemic stroke?	It is caused by a direct blockage of blood flow through the cerebral arteries.
It is caused by a direct blockage of blood flow through the cerebral arteries.	What causes an ischemic stroke?
What causes a hemorrhagic stroke?	It is caused by a blood vessel rupturing, which causes increased pressure in the brain and subsequent brain damage.
It is caused by a blood vessel rupturing, which causes increased pressure in the brain and subsequent brain damage.	What causes a hemorrhagic stroke?
What is thrombosis?	It is when a clot forms at the site of blockage.
It is when a clot forms at the site of blockage.	What is thrombosis?
What is embolus?	It is when a clot forms in a remote area, and then travels to the site of blockage.
It is when a clot forms in a remote area, and then travels to the site of blockage.	What is embolus?
What percentage of strokes are ischemic?	More than 80% of all strokes are caused by this.
More than 80% of all strokes are caused by this.	What percentage of strokes are ischemic?
What is atherosclerosis?	It is a disorder in which calcium and cholesterol build up, forming a plaque inside the walls of the blood vessels.
It is a disorder in which calcium and cholesterol build up, forming a plaque inside the walls of the blood vessels.	What is atherosclerosis?
Who is most at risk for hemorrhagic stroke?	People who have very high blood pressure or long-term elevated blood pressure. After many years of high pressure, the blood vessels in the brain weaken. If a vessel ruptures, the bleeding in the brain will increase the pressure inside the cranium.
People who have very high blood pressure or long-term elevated blood pressure. After many years of high pressure, the blood vessels in the brain weaken. If a vessel ruptures, the bleeding in the brain will increase the pressure inside the cranium.	Who is most at risk for hemorrhagic stroke?
What is an aneurysm?	It is a swelling or enlargement of part of an artery resulting from weakening of the arterial wall.
It is a swelling or enlargement of part of an artery resulting from weakening of the arterial wall.	What is an aneurysm?
What is the likely cause of a hemorrhagic stroke in an otherwise healthy person?	The likely cause is often a weakness in a blood vessel called a berry aneurysm.
The likely cause is often a weakness in a blood vessel called a berry aneurysm.	What is the likely cause of a hemorrhagic stroke in an otherwise healthy person?
What is a berry aneurysm?	This type of aneurysm resembles a tiny balloon (or berry) that juts out from the artery. When the aneurysm is overstreched and ruptures, blood spurts into an area between two of the coverings of the brain called the subarachnoid space. These types of strokes are called subarachnoid space.
This type of aneurysm resembles a tiny balloon (or berry) that juts out from the artery. When the aneurysm is overstreched and ruptures, blood spurts into an area between two of the coverings of the brain called the subarachnoid space. These types of strokes are called subarachnoid space.	What is a berry aneurysm?
What is a transient ischemic attack (TIA)?	This is when stroke symptoms go away on their own in less than 24 hours. Some patients call these ministrokes.
This is when stroke symptoms go away on their own in less than 24 hours. Some patients call these ministrokes.	What is a transient ischemic attack (TIA)?
How many patients who have experienced a TIA will experience a stroke soon after?	Approximately 1/3 will experience one.
Approximately 1/3 will experience one.	How many patients who have experienced a TIA will experience a stroke soon after?
What are the general signs and symptoms of stroke?	They include: Facial drooping, sudden weakness or numbness in the face, arm, leg, or one side of the body, loss of movement and sensation on one side of the body, ataxia, sudden loss of vision in one eye, difficulty swallowing, decreased or increased level of responsiveness, dysphasia, expressive aphasia, dysarthria, receptive aphasia, decreased or absent movement in one or more extremities, sudden or severe headache, sudden loss of balance or trouble walking, confusion, dizziness, weakness, combativeness, restlessness, tongue deviation, coma.
They include: Facial drooping, sudden weakness or numbness in the face, arm, leg, or one side of the body, loss of movement and sensation on one side of the body, ataxia, sudden loss of vision in one eye, difficulty swallowing, decreased or increased level of responsiveness, dysphasia, expressive aphasia, dysarthria, receptive aphasia, decreased or absent movement in one or more extremities, sudden or severe headache, sudden loss of balance or trouble walking, confusion, dizziness, weakness, combativeness, restlessness, tongue deviation, coma.	What are the general signs and symptoms of stroke?
What is aphasia?	It is an inability to produce or understand speech. It may be caused by a stroke in the left cerebral hemisphere.
It is an inability to produce or understand speech. It may be caused by a stroke in the left cerebral hemisphere.	What is aphasia?
What are some signs that a patient's right cerebral hemisphere is not getting enough oxygen?	In this situation, patients will understand langauge and be able to speak, but their words may be slurred and hard to understand. If you ask the patient to life their left arm and they cannot, they will lift their right arm instead; they seem to have forgotten that the left arm even exists (neglect).
In this situation, patients will understand langauge and be able to speak, but their words may be slurred and hard to understand. If you ask the patient to life their left arm and they cannot, they will lift their right arm instead; they seem to have forgotten that the left arm even exists (neglect).	What are some signs that a patient's right cerebral hemisphere is not getting enough oxygen?
What might high blood pressure be a result of regarding a cerebral hemorrhage?	High blood pressure can cause the bleeding, but many times the high blood pressure is a compensatory response to the bleeding itself.
High blood pressure can cause the bleeding, but many times the high blood pressure is a compensatory response to the bleeding itself.	What might high blood pressure be a result of regarding a cerebral hemorrhage?
What happens when bleeding occurs inside the brain?	When this happens, the pressure inside the skull increases.
When this happens, the pressure inside the skull increases.	What happens when bleeding occurs inside the brain?
What are three conditions may appear to be a stroke?	The three conditions are hypoglycemia, a postictal state, and subdural or epidural bleeding that presses on the brain.
The three conditions are hypoglycemia, a postictal state, and subdural or epidural bleeding that presses on the brain.	What are three conditions may appear to be a stroke?
Why would a hypoglycemic patient present as someone having a stroke?	This is because oxygen and glucose are both needed for the brain's metabolism.
This is because oxygen and glucose are both needed for the brain's metabolism.	Why would a hypoglycemic patient present as someone having a stroke?
What is a lucid interval?	It is the period between injury and deterioration (minutes to hours) during an epidural hemorrhage.
It is the period between injury and deterioration (minutes to hours) during an epidural hemorrhage.	What is a lucid interval?
How many EMS 911 calls involve a patient with a stroke?	As many as 30% of them involve this.
As many as 30% of them involve this.	How many EMS 911 calls involve a patient with a stroke?
How many people are estimated to have epilepsy?	c. 4 million people in the US have it.
c. 4 million people in the US have it.	How many people are estimated to have epilepsy?
What is the leading cause of death in the United States among people under 40?	Traumatic Injuries are the leading cause of death for this group.
Traumatic Injuries are the leading cause of death for this group.	What is the leading cause of death in the United States among people under 40?
What causes trauma emergencies?	They occur as a result of physical forces applied to the body.
They occur as a result of physical forces applied to the body.	What causes trauma emergencies?
What are the three concepts of energy typically associated with injury (exluding thermal)?	They are potential energy, kinetic energy, and work.
They are potential energy, kinetic energy, and work.	What are the three concepts of energy typically associated with injury (exluding thermal)?
What is Newton's first law?	Newton's first law states that objects at rest tend to stay at rest and objects in motion tend to stay in motion, unless acted on by some force.
Newton's first law states that objects at rest tend to stay at rest and objects in motion tend to stay in motion, unless acted on by some force.	What is Newton's first law?
What is Newton's second law?	It is that Force (F) equals Mass (M) times acceleration (A), that is: F=M(A)
It is that Force (F) equals Mass (M) times acceleration (A), that is: F=M(A)	What is Newton's second law?
What is Newton's third law?	It is that for every action, there is an equal and opposite reaction.
It is that for every action, there is an equal and opposite reaction.	What is Newton's third law?
What is work?	It defined as force acting over a distance.
It defined as force acting over a distance.	What is work?
What is kinetic energy?	It is the energy of a moving object.
It is the energy of a moving object.	What is kinetic energy?
What is the equation for kinetic energy?	The equation is: KE=m/2 x v2
The equation is: KE=m/2 x v2	What is the equation for kinetic energy?
What is relation between energy and speed regarding  energy available to cause injury?	Notice that the energy available to cause injury doubles when an object's weight doubles, but quadruples when an object's speed doubles.
Notice that the energy available to cause injury doubles when an object's weight doubles, but quadruples when an object's speed doubles.	What is relation between energy and speed regarding  energy available to cause injury?
What is potential energy?	It is the product of mass, force of gravity, and height, and is mostly associated with the energy of falling objects.
It is the product of mass, force of gravity, and height, and is mostly associated with the energy of falling objects.	What is potential energy?
What are some examples of significant MOIs?	They include multi-system trauma, falls from heights, motor vehicle and motorcycle crashes, car versus pedestrian, gunshot wounds, and stabbings.
They include multi-system trauma, falls from heights, motor vehicle and motorcycle crashes, car versus pedestrian, gunshot wounds, and stabbings.	What are some examples of significant MOIs?
What are the two types of traumas?	They are blunt trauma and penetrating trauma.
They are blunt trauma and penetrating trauma.	What are the two types of traumas?
What is blunt trauma?	It is the result of force (or energy transmission) to the body that causes injury without penetrating the soft tissues or internal organs and cavities.
It is the result of force (or energy transmission) to the body that causes injury without penetrating the soft tissues or internal organs and cavities.	What is blunt trauma?
What is penetrating trauma?	It is caused by objects that primarily pierce and penetrate the surface of the body and cause damage to soft tissues, internal organs, and body cavities.
It is caused by objects that primarily pierce and penetrate the surface of the body and cause damage to soft tissues, internal organs, and body cavities.	What is penetrating trauma?
What are the five classifications of car crashes?	They are classified as frontal (head-on), rear-end, lateral (T-bone), rollovers, and rotational (spins).
They are classified as frontal (head-on), rear-end, lateral (T-bone), rollovers, and rotational (spins).	What are the five classifications of car crashes?
What are the three collisions in a typical vehicular impact?	They are: The collision of the car against another car, a tree, or another object; The collision of the passenger against the interior of the car; and the collision of the passenger's internal organs against the solid structures of the body.
They are: The collision of the car against another car, a tree, or another object; The collision of the passenger against the interior of the car; and the collision of the passenger's internal organs against the solid structures of the body.	What are the three collisions in a typical vehicular impact?
What are some common passenger injuries in a vehicular crash?	They include lower extremity fractures (knees into the dashboard), flail chest (rib cage into the steering wheel), and head trauma (head into the windshield).
They include lower extremity fractures (knees into the dashboard), flail chest (rib cage into the steering wheel), and head trauma (head into the windshield).	What are some common passenger injuries in a vehicular crash?
What is coup-contrecoup brain injury?	It is a result of trauma to the head that causes a compression injury (or bruising) to the anteior portion of the brain and streching (or tearing) of the posterior portion of the brain.
It is a result of trauma to the head that causes a compression injury (or bruising) to the anteior portion of the brain and streching (or tearing) of the posterior portion of the brain.	What is coup-contrecoup brain injury?
What should you suspect if you see a contusion on the patient's forehead and the windshield is starred?	In this situation you should strongly suspect an injury to the brain.
In this situation you should strongly suspect an injury to the brain.	What should you suspect if you see a contusion on the patient's forehead and the windshield is starred?
What should you always suspect whenever there is a significant impact to the head?	In this situation, you should also suspect a spinal injury.
In this situation, you should also suspect a spinal injury.	What should you always suspect whenever there is a significant impact to the head?
If one or more of the passengers in a vehicular crash are dead, what action must be taken?	In this situation, you should suspect that the other passengers have sustained serious injuries.
In this situation, you should suspect that the other passengers have sustained serious injuries.	If one or more of the passengers in a vehicular crash are dead, what action must be taken?
What should you initially determine when investigating a frontal crash?	In this event, you should determine whether the passenger was restrained by a full and properly applied three-point restraint, as well as whether the airbag deployed. Identifying the types of restraints used and whether the airbags were deployed will help you identify injury patterns related to the supplemental restraint systems.
In this event, you should determine whether the passenger was restrained by a full and properly applied three-point restraint, as well as whether the airbag deployed. Identifying the types of restraints used and whether the airbags were deployed will help you identify injury patterns related to the supplemental restraint systems.	What should you initially determine when investigating a frontal crash?
"Where should children shorter than 4'9"" sit in a car."	This kind of person should ride in the rear seat or, in the case of a pickup truck or other single-seated vehicle, the air bag should be turned off.
This kind of person should ride in the rear seat or, in the case of a pickup truck or other single-seated vehicle, the air bag should be turned off.	"Where should children shorter than 4'9"" sit in a car."
Where are seatbelts designed to be worn?	They are designed to be worn over the iliac crest of the pelvis in order to distribute the force over the bony surface.
They are designed to be worn over the iliac crest of the pelvis in order to distribute the force over the bony surface.	Where are seatbelts designed to be worn?
What type of injuries are associated with rear-end impacts?	This type of impact is known to cause whiplash-type injuries, particularly when the passenger's head and/or neck is not restrained by an appropriately placed headset.
This type of impact is known to cause whiplash-type injuries, particularly when the passenger's head and/or neck is not restrained by an appropriately placed headset.	What type of injuries are associated with rear-end impacts?
What is one type of injury to be aware of in a lateral (T-bone) collision?	In this type of collision, the car is typically struck above its center of gravity and begins to rock away from the side of the impact. This results in the passenger sustaining a lateral whiplash injury. The cervical spine has little tolerance for lateral bending.
In this type of collision, the car is typically struck above its center of gravity and begins to rock away from the side of the impact. This results in the passenger sustaining a lateral whiplash injury. The cervical spine has little tolerance for lateral bending.	What is one type of injury to be aware of in a lateral (T-bone) collision?
What is the most common life-threatening event in a rollover?	In this event, the most common life-threatening event is ejection or partial ejection of the passenger from the vehicle.
In this event, the most common life-threatening event is ejection or partial ejection of the passenger from the vehicle.	What is the most common life-threatening event in a rollover?
What should the first step be when evaluating the MOI in a car-versus-pedestrian collision?	In this event, your first step should be to estimate the speed of the vehicle that struck the patient; next determine whether the patient was thrown through the air and at what distance or whether the patient was pulled under the vehicle.
In this event, your first step should be to estimate the speed of the vehicle that struck the patient; next determine whether the patient was thrown through the air and at what distance or whether the patient was pulled under the vehicle.	What should the first step be when evaluating the MOI in a car-versus-pedestrian collision?
What should you presume in a bicycle collision?	In this event, you should presume that the patient has sustained an injury to the spinal column, until proven otherwise at the hospital.
In this event, you should presume that the patient has sustained an injury to the spinal column, until proven otherwise at the hospital.	What should you presume in a bicycle collision?
What are the four types of motorcycle impacts?	The four types are head-on collision, angular, ejection, and controlled crash.
The four types are head-on collision, angular, ejection, and controlled crash.	What are the four types of motorcycle impacts?
At what height should a fall be considered significant?	More than 15' or 3 times the patient's height is considered significant.
More than 15' or 3 times the patient's height is considered significant.	At what height should a fall be considered significant?
What is something to consider in older patients who have suffered a fall?	In this situation, remember that the patient may have osteoporosis, and may have actually sustained a fracture before the fall.
In this situation, remember that the patient may have osteoporosis, and may have actually sustained a fracture before the fall.	What is something to consider in older patients who have suffered a fall?
What does the CNS (Central Nervous System) include?	It includes the brain and the spinal cord, including the nuclei and cell bodies of most nerve cells, and long nerve fibers that link these cells to the body's various organs through openings in the spinal column.
It includes the brain and the spinal cord, including the nuclei and cell bodies of most nerve cells, and long nerve fibers that link these cells to the body's various organs through openings in the spinal column.	What does the CNS (Central Nervous System) include?
What is the cerebrum?	It contains about 75% of the brain's total volume, and controls a wide variety of activities, including most voluntary motor functions and conscious thought.
It contains about 75% of the brain's total volume, and controls a wide variety of activities, including most voluntary motor functions and conscious thought.	What is the cerebrum?
What is the brain stem?	It controls virtually all the functions that are necessary for life, including the cardiac and respiratory systems and nerve function transmissions. It is deep inside the cranium and is the best-protected part of the CNS.
It controls virtually all the functions that are necessary for life, including the cardiac and respiratory systems and nerve function transmissions. It is deep inside the cranium and is the best-protected part of the CNS.	What is the brain stem?
What is grey matter composed of?	This is composed of neural cell bodies and synapses, which are connections between nerve cells.
This is composed of neural cell bodies and synapses, which are connections between nerve cells.	What is grey matter composed of?
What does white matter consist of?	This consists of fiber pathways.
This consists of fiber pathways.	What does white matter consist of?
What is the skull covered by?	It is covered by layers of muscle, superficial fascia, and thick skin.
It is covered by layers of muscle, superficial fascia, and thick skin.	What is the skull covered by?
What protects the CNS?	It is protected by the meninges, three distinct laters of tissue that suspend the brain and the spinal cord within the skull and the spinal canal..
It is protected by the meninges, three distinct laters of tissue that suspend the brain and the spinal cord within the skull and the spinal canal..	What protects the CNS?
What is the outer layer of the meninges?	It is the dura mater, a tough fibrous layer that closely resembles leather.
It is the dura mater, a tough fibrous layer that closely resembles leather.	What is the outer layer of the meninges?
What are the two inner layers of the meninges?	They are the arachnoid and the pia mater. They contain the blood vessels that nourish the brain and spinal cord.
They are the arachnoid and the pia mater. They contain the blood vessels that nourish the brain and spinal cord.	What are the two inner layers of the meninges?
Where is CSF (Cerebral Spinal Fluid) produced?	This is produced inside a chamber in the brain, called the third ventricle.
This is produced inside a chamber in the brain, called the third ventricle.	Where is CSF (Cerebral Spinal Fluid) produced?
Where is cerebral spinal fluid,  A.K.A. CSF, located?	This is located in the subarachnoid space below the arachnoid.
This is located in the subarachnoid space below the arachnoid.	Where is cerebral spinal fluid,  A.K.A. CSF, located?
How much CSF is in the brain at any one time?	There is approximately 125 to 150 ml of this in the brain at any one time.
There is approximately 125 to 150 ml of this in the brain at any one time.	How much CSF is in the brain at any one time?
What is the primary purpose of CSF?	The primary purpose of this is to act as a shock absorber for the brain.
The primary purpose of this is to act as a shock absorber for the brain.	What is the primary purpose of CSF?
How many anatomic parts does the peripheral nervous system have?	It has two parts: 31 pairs of spinal nerves and 12 pairs of cranial nerves.
It has two parts: 31 pairs of spinal nerves and 12 pairs of cranial nerves.	How many anatomic parts does the peripheral nervous system have?
How many pairs of spinal nerves are there?	There are 31 pairs of these.
There are 31 pairs of these.	How many pairs of spinal nerves are there?
What do the spinal nerves do?	They conduct sensory impulses from the skin and other organs to the spinal cord.
They conduct sensory impulses from the skin and other organs to the spinal cord.	What do the spinal nerves do?
What does the brachial plexus control?	This controls the arms.
This controls the arms.	What does the brachial plexus control?
What does the lumbosacral plexus control?	This controls the legs.
This controls the legs.	What does the lumbosacral plexus control?
How many pairs of cranial nerves are there?	There 12 pairs of these.
There 12 pairs of these.	How many pairs of cranial nerves are there?
What are cranial nerves?	These emerge from the brain stem and transmit information directly to or from the brain. For the most part, they perform special functions in the head and face, including sight, smell, taste, hearing, and facial expressions.
These emerge from the brain stem and transmit information directly to or from the brain. For the most part, they perform special functions in the head and face, including sight, smell, taste, hearing, and facial expressions.	What are cranial nerves?
What are the two major types of peripheral nerves?	They are the sensory nerves and motor nerves.
They are the sensory nerves and motor nerves.	What are the two major types of peripheral nerves?
What do the sensory nerves do?	These carry information from the body to the brain via the spinal cord.
These carry information from the body to the brain via the spinal cord.	What do the sensory nerves do?
What do the motor nerves do?	These carry information from the CNS to the muscles.
These carry information from the CNS to the muscles.	What do the motor nerves do?
What are connecting nerves?	These, found only in the brain and spinal cord, connect the sensory and motor nerves with short fibers, which allow the cells on either end to exchange simple messages.
These, found only in the brain and spinal cord, connect the sensory and motor nerves with short fibers, which allow the cells on either end to exchange simple messages.	What are connecting nerves?
What are voluntary activities?	These are actions which are consciously perform, in which sensory input determines the specific muscular activity.
These are actions which are consciously perform, in which sensory input determines the specific muscular activity.	What are voluntary activities?
What are involuntary activities?	These are actions that are not under a person's conscious control, such as breathing.
These are actions that are not under a person's conscious control, such as breathing.	What are involuntary activities?
What part of our nervous system controls our voluntary activities?	This is called the somatic or voluntary nervous system.
This is called the somatic or voluntary nervous system.	What part of our nervous system controls our voluntary activities?
What part of our nervous system controls many of our body's vital organs, over which the brain has no voluntary control?	This is called the autonomic nervous system.
This is called the autonomic nervous system.	What part of our nervous system controls many of our body's vital organs, over which the brain has no voluntary control?
What are the names of the two parts of the autonomic nervous system?	They are called the sympathetic and the parasympathetic.
They are called the sympathetic and the parasympathetic.	What are the names of the two parts of the autonomic nervous system?
What is the name of the groups of bones that compose the skull?	They are called the cranium, which protects the brain, and the facial bones.
They are called the cranium, which protects the brain, and the facial bones.	What is the name of the groups of bones that compose the skull?
What is the cranium occupied by?	It is occupied by 80% brain tissue, 10% blood supply, and 10% CSF.
It is occupied by 80% brain tissue, 10% blood supply, and 10% CSF.	What is the cranium occupied by?
What are the four major bones that make up the cranium?	These are the occiput in the posterior, temple or temporal regions at the lateral portions, the parietal regions between the occiput and temporal regions, and forehead anteriorly.
These are the occiput in the posterior, temple or temporal regions at the lateral portions, the parietal regions between the occiput and temporal regions, and forehead anteriorly.	What are the four major bones that make up the cranium?
What is the body's central supporting structure?	It is the spinal column.
It is the spinal column.	What is the body's central supporting structure?
How many bones or vertebrae does the spinal column have?	It has 33 bones or vertebrae.
It has 33 bones or vertebrae.	How many bones or vertebrae does the spinal column have?
What are the five sections of the spinal column, and how many vertebrae in each?	They are the cervical (7), thoracic (12), lumbar (5), sacral (5), and coccygeal (4).
They are the cervical (7), thoracic (12), lumbar (5), sacral (5), and coccygeal (4).	What are the five sections of the spinal column, and how many vertebrae in each?
What connects and separates the vertebrae?	They are connected by ligaments and separated by cushions known as intervertebral disks.
They are connected by ligaments and separated by cushions known as intervertebral disks.	What connects and separates the vertebrae?
How many people in the US experience head injuries each year?	Approximately 4 million people experience this.
Approximately 4 million people experience this.	How many people in the US experience head injuries each year?
How many death occur annually as a result of head injury?	52,000 of these occur annually.
52,000 of these occur annually.	How many death occur annually as a result of head injury?
What percentage of traumatic deaths are a result of head injuries?	50% of all traumatic deaths result from this.
50% of all traumatic deaths result from this.	What percentage of traumatic deaths are a result of head injuries?
What are closed head injuries?	These are injuries in which the brain has been injured but there is no opening into the brain.
These are injuries in which the brain has been injured but there is no opening into the brain.	What are closed head injuries?
What is an open head injury?	This is an injury in which an opening from the brain to the outside world exists.
This is an injury in which an opening from the brain to the outside world exists.	What is an open head injury?
What percentage of people involved in motor vehicle crashes experience a head injury?	More than 2/3s of people in motor vehicle crashes experience this.
More than 2/3s of people in motor vehicle crashes experience this.	What percentage of people involved in motor vehicle crashes experience a head injury?
What are the general signs and symptoms of a head injury?	The general signs and symptoms of this are: Lacerations, contusions, or hematomas to the scalp; Soft area or depression on palpation; Visible fractures or deformities of the skull; Decreased mentation; Irregular breathing pattern; Widening pulse pressure; Slow heart rate; Ecchymosis about the eyes or behind the ear over the mastoid process; Clear or pink CSF leakage from a scalp wound, the nose, or the ear; Failure of the pupils to respond to light; Unequal pupil size; Loss of sensation and/or motor function; A period of unconsciousness; Amnesia; Seizures; Numbness or tingling in the extremities; Irregular respirations; Dizziness; Visual complaints; Combative or other abnormal behavior; Nausea or vomiting; Posturing (decorticate or decerebrate)
The general signs and symptoms of this are: Lacerations, contusions, or hematomas to the scalp; Soft area or depression on palpation; Visible fractures or deformities of the skull; Decreased mentation; Irregular breathing pattern; Widening pulse pressure; Slow heart rate; Ecchymosis about the eyes or behind the ear over the mastoid process; Clear or pink CSF leakage from a scalp wound, the nose, or the ear; Failure of the pupils to respond to light; Unequal pupil size; Loss of sensation and/or motor function; A period of unconsciousness; Amnesia; Seizures; Numbness or tingling in the extremities; Irregular respirations; Dizziness; Visual complaints; Combative or other abnormal behavior; Nausea or vomiting; Posturing (decorticate or decerebrate)	What are the general signs and symptoms of a head injury?
Where is a skull fracture diagnosis usually made?	This is usually made in a hospital with a computed tomographic, or CT, scan.
This is usually made in a hospital with a computed tomographic, or CT, scan.	Where is a skull fracture diagnosis usually made?
What are some signs of a skull fracture?	Some signs of this are ecchymosis (bruising) that develops under the eyes (aka raccoon eyes) or behind one ear over the mastoid process (aka battle's sign).
Some signs of this are ecchymosis (bruising) that develops under the eyes (aka raccoon eyes) or behind one ear over the mastoid process (aka battle's sign).	What are some signs of a skull fracture?
What % of skull fractures are linear skull fractures (aka nondisplaced skull fractures)?	Appromixately 80% of all skull fractures are these kind.
Appromixately 80% of all skull fractures are these kind.	What % of skull fractures are linear skull fractures (aka nondisplaced skull fractures)?
What causes compressed skull fractures?	These result from high-energy direct trauma to the head with a blunt object (such as a baseball bat to the head).
These result from high-energy direct trauma to the head with a blunt object (such as a baseball bat to the head).	What causes compressed skull fractures?
What are basilar skull fractures?	These are associated with high-energy trauma, and usually occur following diffuse impact to the headj (e.g. falls, motor crashes). These injuries generally result from extension of a linear fracture to the base of the skull and can be difficult to diagnose with radiography (X-ray).
These are associated with high-energy trauma, and usually occur following diffuse impact to the headj (e.g. falls, motor crashes). These injuries generally result from extension of a linear fracture to the base of the skull and can be difficult to diagnose with radiography (X-ray).	What are basilar skull fractures?
What are the signs of a basilar skull fracture?	Signs of this include CSF drainage from the ears (a risk for bacterial meningitis), which indicates rupture of the tympanic membrane in the ear. Other signs include raccoon eyes or battle's sign.
Signs of this include CSF drainage from the ears (a risk for bacterial meningitis), which indicates rupture of the tympanic membrane in the ear. Other signs include raccoon eyes or battle's sign.	What are the signs of a basilar skull fracture?
What is a traumatic brain injury (TBI)?	"These are defined as ""a traumatic insult to the brain capable of producing physical, intellectual, emotional, social, and vocational changes"" (from the National Head Injury Foundation)."
"These are defined as ""a traumatic insult to the brain capable of producing physical, intellectual, emotional, social, and vocational changes"" (from the National Head Injury Foundation)."	What is a traumatic brain injury (TBI)?
What are the two broad catagories of TBI?	These are primary (direct) injuries and secondary (indirect) injuries.
These are primary (direct) injuries and secondary (indirect) injuries.	What are the two broad catagories of TBI?
What are primary (direct) injuries?	These are injury to the brain and its associated structures that results instantaneously from impact to the head.
These are injury to the brain and its associated structures that results instantaneously from impact to the head.	What are primary (direct) injuries?
What are secondary (indirect) brain injuries?	These refer to a multitude of processes that increase the severity of a primary brain injury and therefore, negatively impact the outcome.
These refer to a multitude of processes that increase the severity of a primary brain injury and therefore, negatively impact the outcome.	What are secondary (indirect) brain injuries?
What are the two most common causes of secondary injuries to the brain?	The two most common causes of this are hypoxia and hypotension.
The two most common causes of this are hypoxia and hypotension.	What are the two most common causes of secondary injuries to the brain?
What are some causes of secondary injuries to the brain?	These may be caused by cerebral edema, intracranial hemorrhage, increased intracranial pressure, cerebral ischemia, infection, and hypoxia and hypotension (the two most common causes).
These may be caused by cerebral edema, intracranial hemorrhage, increased intracranial pressure, cerebral ischemia, infection, and hypoxia and hypotension (the two most common causes).	What are some causes of secondary injuries to the brain?
How long after a TBI can secondary brain injuries occur?	They can occur anywhere from a few minuters to several days following the injury.
They can occur anywhere from a few minuters to several days following the injury.	How long after a TBI can secondary brain injuries occur?
What is coup-contrecoup injury?	This is when the brain strikes the front and back of the skull due to rapid deceleration.
This is when the brain strikes the front and back of the skull due to rapid deceleration.	What is coup-contrecoup injury?
What is cerebral edema?	This is swelling of the brain, and may not develop until several hours after the initial injury.
This is swelling of the brain, and may not develop until several hours after the initial injury.	What is cerebral edema?
What aggravates and improves cerebral edema?	This is aggravated by low oxygen levels in the blood, and improved by high ones. This is especially true if the patient is unconscious.
This is aggravated by low oxygen levels in the blood, and improved by high ones. This is especially true if the patient is unconscious.	What aggravates and improves cerebral edema?
Why is it not uncommon for a patient with a head injury to have a seizure?	This is not uncommon for a patient with a head injury as a result of excessive excitability of the brain, caused by direct injury or the accumulation of fluid within the brain (edema).
This is not uncommon for a patient with a head injury as a result of excessive excitability of the brain, caused by direct injury or the accumulation of fluid within the brain (edema).	Why is it not uncommon for a patient with a head injury to have a seizure?
What can lead to a rapid increase in intracranial pressure?	This can be caused by an accumulation of blood within the skull or swelling of the brain.
This can be caused by an accumulation of blood within the skull or swelling of the brain.	What can lead to a rapid increase in intracranial pressure?
What are the signs and symptoms of a mild elevation of intracranial pressure?	The signs and symptoms of this are: Increased blood pressure and decreased pulse rate; Pupils that are still reactive; Cheyne-Strokes respirations (respirations that are fast and then become slow, with intervening periods of apnea); Patient initially attempts to localize and remove painful stimuli, followed by withdrawal and extension; [EFFECTS ARE REVERSIBLE WITH PROMPT TREATMENT]
The signs and symptoms of this are: Increased blood pressure and decreased pulse rate; Pupils that are still reactive; Cheyne-Strokes respirations (respirations that are fast and then become slow, with intervening periods of apnea); Patient initially attempts to localize and remove painful stimuli, followed by withdrawal and extension; [EFFECTS ARE REVERSIBLE WITH PROMPT TREATMENT]	What are the signs and symptoms of a mild elevation of intracranial pressure?
What are the signs and symptoms of moderate elevation in intracranial pressure?	The signs and symptoms of this are: Widened pulse pressure and bradycardia; Pupils that are sluggish or nonreactive; Central neurogenic hyperventilation (deep, rapid respirations); Decerebrate posturing; [SURVIVAL IS POSSIBLE BUT NOT WITHOUT PERMANENT NEUROLOGIC DEFICIT]
The signs and symptoms of this are: Widened pulse pressure and bradycardia; Pupils that are sluggish or nonreactive; Central neurogenic hyperventilation (deep, rapid respirations); Decerebrate posturing; [SURVIVAL IS POSSIBLE BUT NOT WITHOUT PERMANENT NEUROLOGIC DEFICIT]	What are the signs and symptoms of moderate elevation in intracranial pressure?
What are the signs and symptoms of marked elevation in intracranial pressure?	The signs and symptoms of this are: Unilateral fixed and dilated pupils; Ataxic respirations (characterized by irregular rate, pattern, and volume of breathing with intermittent periods of apnea), or absent respirations; Flaccid response to painful stimuli; Irregular pulse rate; Diminished blood pressure; NB: This level of ICP indicates that the lower portion of the brain stem is involved [MOST PATIENTS DO NOT SURVIVE THIS LEVEL OF INTRACRANIAL PRESSURE]
The signs and symptoms of this are: Unilateral fixed and dilated pupils; Ataxic respirations (characterized by irregular rate, pattern, and volume of breathing with intermittent periods of apnea), or absent respirations; Flaccid response to painful stimuli; Irregular pulse rate; Diminished blood pressure; NB: This level of ICP indicates that the lower portion of the brain stem is involved [MOST PATIENTS DO NOT SURVIVE THIS LEVEL OF INTRACRANIAL PRESSURE]	What are the signs and symptoms of marked elevation in intracranial pressure?
What is an epidural hematoma?	This is an accumulation of blood between the skull and dura mater.
This is an accumulation of blood between the skull and dura mater.	What is an epidural hematoma?
What is a common cause of epidural hematoma?	These are nearly always the result of a blow to the head that produces a linear fracture of the thin temporal bone, where the middle meningeal artery runs along and is vulnerable in the event of a fracture.
These are nearly always the result of a blow to the head that produces a linear fracture of the thin temporal bone, where the middle meningeal artery runs along and is vulnerable in the event of a fracture.	What is a common cause of epidural hematoma?
What is the patients condition immediately following an injury that causes an epidural hematoma?	In this situation, the patient often loses consciousness immediately following the injury; this is often followed by a brief period of consciousness (aka lucid interval), after which the patient lapses back into unconsciousness.
In this situation, the patient often loses consciousness immediately following the injury; this is often followed by a brief period of consciousness (aka lucid interval), after which the patient lapses back into unconsciousness.	What is the patients condition immediately following an injury that causes an epidural hematoma?
What is a subdural hematoma?	This is an accumulation of blood beneath the dura mater but outside the brain. They are more common than epidural hematomas and may or may not be associated with a skull fracture.
This is an accumulation of blood beneath the dura mater but outside the brain. They are more common than epidural hematomas and may or may not be associated with a skull fracture.	What is a subdural hematoma?
Why do subdural hematomas and the signs of ICP develop more gradually than epidural hematomas?	These develop more gradually than epidural hematomas because these are associated with venous bleeding.
These develop more gradually than epidural hematomas because these are associated with venous bleeding.	Why do subdural hematomas and the signs of ICP develop more gradually than epidural hematomas?
What is an intracerebral hematoma?	This involves bleeding within the brain tissue itself. They have a high mortality rate.
This involves bleeding within the brain tissue itself. They have a high mortality rate.	What is an intracerebral hematoma?
What is a subarachnoid hemorrhage?	This is when bleeding occurs into the subarachnoid space, where the CSF circulates.
This is when bleeding occurs into the subarachnoid space, where the CSF circulates.	What is a subarachnoid hemorrhage?
What are common causes of subarachnoid hematoma?	The common causes of this condition include trauma or rupture of an aneurysm.
The common causes of this condition include trauma or rupture of an aneurysm.	What are common causes of subarachnoid hematoma?
What is a common symptom of a subarachnoid hematoma?	A common symptom of this is a sudden, severe headache. Mortality rates are high, and permanent neurologic impairment is common.
A common symptom of this is a sudden, severe headache. Mortality rates are high, and permanent neurologic impairment is common.	What is a common symptom of a subarachnoid hematoma?
What is a concussion?	This is a mild TBI caused by a blow to the head or face. It is in general a closed injury with a temporary loss of alteration of part or all of the brain's abilities to function without demonstrable physical damage to the brain.
This is a mild TBI caused by a blow to the head or face. It is in general a closed injury with a temporary loss of alteration of part or all of the brain's abilities to function without demonstrable physical damage to the brain.	What is a concussion?
What percentage of patients who sustain a concussion experience a loss of consciousness?	Apprixmiately 10% of these patients experience a loss of consciousness.
Apprixmiately 10% of these patients experience a loss of consciousness.	What percentage of patients who sustain a concussion experience a loss of consciousness?
What is retrograde amneisa?	This is when the patient can remember everything but the events leading up to the injury.
This is when the patient can remember everything but the events leading up to the injury.	What is retrograde amneisa?
What is anterograde (posttraumatic) amnesia?	This is when a patient is unable to remember events after the injury.
This is when a patient is unable to remember events after the injury.	What is anterograde (posttraumatic) amnesia?
What are some additional signs and symptoms you may see in concussion patients?	With these patients, you may see nausea or vomiting, ringing in the ears, slurred speech, and an inability to focus.
With these patients, you may see nausea or vomiting, ringing in the ears, slurred speech, and an inability to focus.	What are some additional signs and symptoms you may see in concussion patients?
What should you always assume with patients with symptoms of a concussion?	You should always assume that these patients have a more serious injury.
You should always assume that these patients have a more serious injury.	What should you always assume with patients with symptoms of a concussion?
What is a brain contusion?	A contusion involves physical injury to the brain tissue, and is therefore more serious than a concussion.
A contusion involves physical injury to the brain tissue, and is therefore more serious than a concussion.	What is a brain contusion?
What often causes spinal compression injuries?	These can occur as a result of a fall, regardless of whether the patient landed on his or her feet, coccyx, or on top of the head.
These can occur as a result of a fall, regardless of whether the patient landed on his or her feet, coccyx, or on top of the head.	What often causes spinal compression injuries?
What is a distraction?	This is when the spine is pulled along its length.
This is when the spine is pulled along its length.	What is a distraction?
What is subluxation?	This is an incomplete dislocation of a joint.
This is an incomplete dislocation of a joint.	What is subluxation?
What is the best way to protect a patient with a spinal injury's airway?	The best way to do this is to use advanced airway techniques employed by AEMT and paramedics.
The best way to do this is to use advanced airway techniques employed by AEMT and paramedics.	What is the best way to protect a patient with a spinal injury's airway?
What does the absence of pain and/or the ability to move and feel extremities tell you about spinal injuries?	This does NOT rule out spinal injuries.
This does NOT rule out spinal injuries.	What does the absence of pain and/or the ability to move and feel extremities tell you about spinal injuries?
What does a gradual and progressive deterioration in the patient's response to stimuli indicate?	This usually indicates serious brain injury that may need surgical treatment; physicians at the hospital will need to know when a loss of consciousness occurs.
This usually indicates serious brain injury that may need surgical treatment; physicians at the hospital will need to know when a loss of consciousness occurs.	What does a gradual and progressive deterioration in the patient's response to stimuli indicate?
What is another name for Cushing's triad?	Another name for this is herniation syndrome.
Another name for this is herniation syndrome.	What is another name for Cushing's triad?
What are the signs of Cushing's triad?	The signs of this are: hypertension, bradycardia, irregular respirations (for example Cheyne-Stokes respirations), central neurogenic hyperventilation, and Biot respirations (irregular rate, pattern, and depth of breathing).
The signs of this are: hypertension, bradycardia, irregular respirations (for example Cheyne-Stokes respirations), central neurogenic hyperventilation, and Biot respirations (irregular rate, pattern, and depth of breathing).	What are the signs of Cushing's triad?
What is Cushing's triad / herniation syndrome?	This is when the intracranial pressure is so great that it forces the brain stem and the midbrain through the foramen magnum.
This is when the intracranial pressure is so great that it forces the brain stem and the midbrain through the foramen magnum.	What is Cushing's triad / herniation syndrome?
What is the prime concern for the patient when you perform the four-person log roll?	The prime concern in this situation is to ensure that the head, torso, and pelvis move as a unit, with your teammates controlling the movement of the body.
The prime concern in this situation is to ensure that the head, torso, and pelvis move as a unit, with your teammates controlling the movement of the body.	What is the prime concern for the patient when you perform the four-person log roll?
What should you do with a patient wandering around after an accident whom you suspect of having a skull or spinal injuries?	In this situation, you should NOT have them lie down; immobilize them with a long backboard in the upright position.
In this situation, you should NOT have them lie down; immobilize them with a long backboard in the upright position.	What should you do with a patient wandering around after an accident whom you suspect of having a skull or spinal injuries?
When should a helmet be left on an injured trauma patient?	This should always be left on provided: There are no impending airway or breathing problems; it does not interfere with assessment and treatment of airway or ventilation problems; and you can properly immobilize the spine.
This should always be left on provided: There are no impending airway or breathing problems; it does not interfere with assessment and treatment of airway or ventilation problems; and you can properly immobilize the spine.	When should a helmet be left on an injured trauma patient?
When should a helmet be removed?	This should be removed from a trauma patient if:  1) It makes assessing or managing airway problems difficult and removing of the face guard is not possible.  2) It prevents you from properly immobilizing the spine.  Or 3) It allows excessive head movement.  Remember to always remove in the event of cardiac arrest, and, most importantly: ALWAYS CONSULT WITH MEDICAL CONTROL IF YOU DECIDE TO REMOVE THIS.
This should be removed from a trauma patient if:  1) It makes assessing or managing airway problems difficult and removing of the face guard is not possible.  2) It prevents you from properly immobilizing the spine.  Or 3) It allows excessive head movement.  Remember to always remove in the event of cardiac arrest, and, most importantly: ALWAYS CONSULT WITH MEDICAL CONTROL IF YOU DECIDE TO REMOVE THIS.	When should a helmet be removed?
What is an additional consideration for children with helmets and skull or spinal injuries?	In this situation, they may require additional padding to maintain the in-line neutral position due to their smaller airways and larger heads.
In this situation, they may require additional padding to maintain the in-line neutral position due to their smaller airways and larger heads.	What is an additional consideration for children with helmets and skull or spinal injuries?
How many emergency department visits are due to chest traumas in the US annually?	More than 700,000 of these are due to them each year.
More than 700,000 of these are due to them each year.	How many emergency department visits are due to chest traumas in the US annually?
How many deaths are cuased by chest trauma in the US annually?	More than 18,000 deaths are caused by this annually.
More than 18,000 deaths are caused by this annually.	How many deaths are cuased by chest trauma in the US annually?
What are the intercostal muscles?	These muscles extend between the ribs, and are innervated from the spinal nerves originating in the cervical region C6 and C7, and allow the chest to expand on contraction and allow for the active portion of ventilation to occur.
These muscles extend between the ribs, and are innervated from the spinal nerves originating in the cervical region C6 and C7, and allow the chest to expand on contraction and allow for the active portion of ventilation to occur.	What are the intercostal muscles?
What is belly breathing?	This occurs when a patient is breathing entirely with their diaphragm, and is considered a clinical or positive diagnostic finding that indicates cord damage at or above the C6 or C7 level.
This occurs when a patient is breathing entirely with their diaphragm, and is considered a clinical or positive diagnostic finding that indicates cord damage at or above the C6 or C7 level.	What is belly breathing?
What is a closed chest injury?	This is an injury in which the skin is not broken, and is generally caused by blunt trauma. These types of injuries often cause significant contusions in both the cardiac muscle and lung tissues (pulmonary contusions), impairing the function of these organs.
This is an injury in which the skin is not broken, and is generally caused by blunt trauma. These types of injuries often cause significant contusions in both the cardiac muscle and lung tissues (pulmonary contusions), impairing the function of these organs.	What is a closed chest injury?
What is an open chest injury?	This is when some object penetrates the chest wall itself.
This is when some object penetrates the chest wall itself.	What is an open chest injury?
What kills almost 1/3 of all people who die immediately in car crashes.	1/3 of these patients die as a result of traumatic rupture of the aorta.
1/3 of these patients die as a result of traumatic rupture of the aorta.	What kills almost 1/3 of all people who die immediately in car crashes.
What are the signs and symptoms of chest injury?	Signs and symptoms of these are: Pain at the site of injury; Pain localized at the site of injury that is aggravated by or increasing with breathing; Bruising to the chest wall; Crepitus with palpation of the chest; Any penetrating injury to the chest; Dyspnea; Hemoptysis (coughing up blood); Failure of one or both sides of the chest to expand normally with inspiration; Rapid, weak pulse and low blood pressure; Cyanosis around the lips or fingernails
Signs and symptoms of these are: Pain at the site of injury; Pain localized at the site of injury that is aggravated by or increasing with breathing; Bruising to the chest wall; Crepitus with palpation of the chest; Any penetrating injury to the chest; Dyspnea; Hemoptysis (coughing up blood); Failure of one or both sides of the chest to expand normally with inspiration; Rapid, weak pulse and low blood pressure; Cyanosis around the lips or fingernails	What are the signs and symptoms of chest injury?
What kind of breathing do chest trauma patients often have?	Patients with this injury often have tachypnea and shallow respirations, as it hurts to take a breath.
Patients with this injury often have tachypnea and shallow respirations, as it hurts to take a breath.	What kind of breathing do chest trauma patients often have?
What is pleuritic pain or pleurisy?	This is irritation of or damage to the pleural surfaces, which causes a characteristic sharp or sticking pain with each breath when these normally smooth surfaces slide on one another.
This is irritation of or damage to the pleural surfaces, which causes a characteristic sharp or sticking pain with each breath when these normally smooth surfaces slide on one another.	What is pleuritic pain or pleurisy?
In a patient with chest trauma, what does dyspnea indicate?	This indicates many things, including airway obstruction, damage to the chest wall, improper chest expansion because of the loss of normal control of breathing, or lung compression because of accumulated blood or air in the chest cavity.
This indicates many things, including airway obstruction, damage to the chest wall, improper chest expansion because of the loss of normal control of breathing, or lung compression because of accumulated blood or air in the chest cavity.	In a patient with chest trauma, what does dyspnea indicate?
What does hemoptysis in a chest trauma patient indicate?	This indicates that the lung itself or the air passages have been damaged.
This indicates that the lung itself or the air passages have been damaged.	What does hemoptysis in a chest trauma patient indicate?
What is paradoxical motion?	This is an abnormality associated with multiple fractured ribs, in which one segment (often referred to as a flail segment) of the chest wall moves opposite the remainder of the chest; that is, out with expiration and in with inspiration.
This is an abnormality associated with multiple fractured ribs, in which one segment (often referred to as a flail segment) of the chest wall moves opposite the remainder of the chest; that is, out with expiration and in with inspiration.	What is paradoxical motion?
What is occlusive dressing?	This is a dressing made of Vaseline-impregnated gauze, aluminum foil, or plastic that protects a wound from air and bacteria.
This is a dressing made of Vaseline-impregnated gauze, aluminum foil, or plastic that protects a wound from air and bacteria.	What is occlusive dressing?
What should you remember when treating a chest trauma patient with positive-pressure ventilation?	In this situation, it is important to remember that you are overcoming normal physiologic functions, and if your patient has pneumothorax, you can easily exacerbate the injury.
In this situation, it is important to remember that you are overcoming normal physiologic functions, and if your patient has pneumothorax, you can easily exacerbate the injury.	What should you remember when treating a chest trauma patient with positive-pressure ventilation?
What are the Deadly Dozen Chest Injuries that must be detected and managed during primary assessment?	These are: 1. Airway obstruction 2. Bronchial disruption 3. Diaphragmatic tear 4. Esophageal injury 5. Open pneumothorax 6. Tension pneumothorax 7. Massive hemothorax 8. Flail chest 9. Cardiac tamponade [SECONDARY ASSESSMENT] 10. Thoracic aortic dissection 11. Myocardial contusion 12. Pulmonary contusion
These are: 1. Airway obstruction 2. Bronchial disruption 3. Diaphragmatic tear 4. Esophageal injury 5. Open pneumothorax 6. Tension pneumothorax 7. Massive hemothorax 8. Flail chest 9. Cardiac tamponade [SECONDARY ASSESSMENT] 10. Thoracic aortic dissection 11. Myocardial contusion 12. Pulmonary contusion	What are the Deadly Dozen Chest Injuries that must be detected and managed during primary assessment?
What should you always be alert for in elderly trauma patient?	With these patients, reduced bone density may cause a number of fractures to the rib cage.
With these patients, reduced bone density may cause a number of fractures to the rib cage.	What should you always be alert for in elderly trauma patient?
What is the difference between hypoxia and hypoxemia?	The first is a decrease in available oxygen; the second is a decreased number of red blood cells that can carry oxygen.
The first is a decrease in available oxygen; the second is a decreased number of red blood cells that can carry oxygen.	What is the difference between hypoxia and hypoxemia?
What is an open pneumothorax?	This is an open or penetrating wound to the chest that  is also called a sucking chest wound. You can actually hear a sucking sound as the patient inhales and a rushing sound as they exhale.
This is an open or penetrating wound to the chest that  is also called a sucking chest wound. You can actually hear a sucking sound as the patient inhales and a rushing sound as they exhale.	What is an open pneumothorax?
Past what percentage of collapse will you start to hear dimished breath sounds on a side of the lungs?	You will hear this after 30% to 40% of collapse.
You will hear this after 30% to 40% of collapse.	Past what percentage of collapse will you start to hear dimished breath sounds on a side of the lungs?
What should you do and in what order when faced with an open pneumothorax?	In this true emergency situation, you should: 1. Clear the airway; 2. Maintian airway; 3. Provide oxygen; 4. Rapidly seal the wound with a sterile occlusive dressing.
In this true emergency situation, you should: 1. Clear the airway; 2. Maintian airway; 3. Provide oxygen; 4. Rapidly seal the wound with a sterile occlusive dressing.	What should you do and in what order when faced with an open pneumothorax?
What is a flutter valve?	This is a one-way valve that allows air to leave the chest cavity but not return. Careful obervation is required after the placement of this dressing.
This is a one-way valve that allows air to leave the chest cavity but not return. Careful obervation is required after the placement of this dressing.	What is a flutter valve?
What should you do if signs of a tension pneumothorax develop?	If this develops, it is suggested that the occlusive dressing be partially removed to allow the chest to vent.
If this develops, it is suggested that the occlusive dressing be partially removed to allow the chest to vent.	What should you do if signs of a tension pneumothorax develop?
What is the weakened area of the lung called?	This area is called a bleb.
This area is called a bleb.	What is the weakened area of the lung called?
What is spontaneous pneumothorax?	This event is not related to any major injury but simply happens with normal breathing or may occur during times of strenous physical activity such as exercise or coughing forcefully.
This event is not related to any major injury but simply happens with normal breathing or may occur during times of strenous physical activity such as exercise or coughing forcefully.	What is spontaneous pneumothorax?
What is simple pneumothorax?	This condition is any pneumothorax that does not result in major changes in the patient's physiology.
This condition is any pneumothorax that does not result in major changes in the patient's physiology.	What is simple pneumothorax?
What is a tension pneumothorax?	This conditions occurs when there is significant ongoing air accumulation in the pleural space. This air gradually increases the pressure in the chest, first causing the complete collapse of the affected lung and then pushing the mediastinum (the central part of the chest containing the heart and great vessels) into opposite pleural cavity. This prevents blood from returning through the venae cavae to the heart, ultimately leading to shock and death.
This conditions occurs when there is significant ongoing air accumulation in the pleural space. This air gradually increases the pressure in the chest, first causing the complete collapse of the affected lung and then pushing the mediastinum (the central part of the chest containing the heart and great vessels) into opposite pleural cavity. This prevents blood from returning through the venae cavae to the heart, ultimately leading to shock and death.	What is a tension pneumothorax?
What are common signs and symptoms of tension pneumothorax?	Common signs and symptoms of this are: increasing respiratory distress, altered level of consciousness, distended neck veins, deviation of the trachea to the side of the chest opposite, and decreased breath sounds on the side of the injury.
Common signs and symptoms of this are: increasing respiratory distress, altered level of consciousness, distended neck veins, deviation of the trachea to the side of the chest opposite, and decreased breath sounds on the side of the injury.	What are common signs and symptoms of tension pneumothorax?
What is the most common cause of tension pneumothorax?	The most common cause of this is closed, blunt injury to the chest in which a fractured rib lacerates a lung or bronchus.
The most common cause of this is closed, blunt injury to the chest in which a fractured rib lacerates a lung or bronchus.	What is the most common cause of tension pneumothorax?
What is hemothorax?	This is a condition in which blood collects in the pleural space of the thorax.
This is a condition in which blood collects in the pleural space of the thorax.	What is hemothorax?
What is hemopneumothorax?	This condition is the presence of air and blood in the pleural space of the thorax.
This condition is the presence of air and blood in the pleural space of the thorax.	What is hemopneumothorax?
What is cardiac tamponade (pericardial tamponade)?	This condition occurs more commonly in the presence of penetrating chest trauma, when the protective membrane around the heart (pericardial sac) fills with blood or fluid (pus from an infection). As the fluid amount increases, the heart is less able to fill with blood during relaxation, so the heart cannont pump an adequate amount of blood.
This condition occurs more commonly in the presence of penetrating chest trauma, when the protective membrane around the heart (pericardial sac) fills with blood or fluid (pus from an infection). As the fluid amount increases, the heart is less able to fill with blood during relaxation, so the heart cannont pump an adequate amount of blood.	What is cardiac tamponade (pericardial tamponade)?
What are the signs and symptoms of cardiac tamponade (pericardial tamponade)?	The signs and symptoms of this are referred to as Beck's triad, and include: distended or engorged jugular veins seen on both sides of the trachea, a narrowing pulse pressure (difference between systolic and diasystolic), and muffled heart sounds.
The signs and symptoms of this are referred to as Beck's triad, and include: distended or engorged jugular veins seen on both sides of the trachea, a narrowing pulse pressure (difference between systolic and diasystolic), and muffled heart sounds.	What are the signs and symptoms of cardiac tamponade (pericardial tamponade)?
What is the Frank-Starling mechanism?	This is the mechanism that streches the heart to create a good contraction to pump blood out of the heart's ventricles.
This is the mechanism that streches the heart to create a good contraction to pump blood out of the heart's ventricles.	What is the Frank-Starling mechanism?
What does crepitus (subcutaneous emphysema) indicate in a chest trauma patient?	This condition indicates that air escaping from a lacerated lung is leaking into the chest wall.
This condition indicates that air escaping from a lacerated lung is leaking into the chest wall.	What does crepitus (subcutaneous emphysema) indicate in a chest trauma patient?
What is flail chest?	This condition is when three or more ribs are fractured in two or more places, or if the sternum is fractured along with several ribs, and a segment of the chest wall may detach from the rest of the thoracic cage. This seriously interferes with the body's normal ventilation mechanics and must be addressed quickly.
This condition is when three or more ribs are fractured in two or more places, or if the sternum is fractured along with several ribs, and a segment of the chest wall may detach from the rest of the thoracic cage. This seriously interferes with the body's normal ventilation mechanics and must be addressed quickly.	What is flail chest?
How should you treat a patient with a flail chest?	In this situation, you should maintain the airway, provide respiratory support if necessay, give supplemental oxygen, and perform ongoing assessments for possible pneumothorax or other respiratory complications. Treatment may also include positive-pressure ventilations with a bag-mask device. You can also immobilize the patient with a pillow that the patient can hold against the chest wall.
In this situation, you should maintain the airway, provide respiratory support if necessay, give supplemental oxygen, and perform ongoing assessments for possible pneumothorax or other respiratory complications. Treatment may also include positive-pressure ventilations with a bag-mask device. You can also immobilize the patient with a pillow that the patient can hold against the chest wall.	How should you treat a patient with a flail chest?
What is a pulmonary contusion?	This the injuring or bruising of lung tissue that results in hemorrhage.
This the injuring or bruising of lung tissue that results in hemorrhage.	What is a pulmonary contusion?
When should you suspect pulmonary contusion, and what should you provide?	You should always suspect this in patients with flail chest, and should provide respiratory support and supplemental oxygen to ensure adequate ventilation.
You should always suspect this in patients with flail chest, and should provide respiratory support and supplemental oxygen to ensure adequate ventilation.	When should you suspect pulmonary contusion, and what should you provide?
What is traumatic asphyxia?	This is result of a sudden, severe compression of the chest, which produces a sudden increase in intrathoracic pressure, and results in a characteristic appearance, including distended neck veins, cyanosis in the face and neck, and hemorrhage into the sclera of the eyes.
This is result of a sudden, severe compression of the chest, which produces a sudden increase in intrathoracic pressure, and results in a characteristic appearance, including distended neck veins, cyanosis in the face and neck, and hemorrhage into the sclera of the eyes.	What is traumatic asphyxia?
How should you treat traumatic asphyxia?	This condition is severe and you should provide ventilatory support with supplemental oxygen and monitor the patient's vital signs as you provide IMMEDIATE transport.
This condition is severe and you should provide ventilatory support with supplemental oxygen and monitor the patient's vital signs as you provide IMMEDIATE transport.	How should you treat traumatic asphyxia?
What is myocardial contusion?	This is the bruising of the heart muscle. Provide supplemental oxygen and transport immediately.
This is the bruising of the heart muscle. Provide supplemental oxygen and transport immediately.	What is myocardial contusion?
What is commotio cordis?	This is a blunt chest injury caused by a sudden, direct blow to the chest over the heart that occurs during the critical portion of a heartbeat, possibly resulting in immediate cardiac arrest. The blunt force causes a lethal abnormal heart rhythm called ventricular fibrillation.
This is a blunt chest injury caused by a sudden, direct blow to the chest over the heart that occurs during the critical portion of a heartbeat, possibly resulting in immediate cardiac arrest. The blunt force causes a lethal abnormal heart rhythm called ventricular fibrillation.	What is commotio cordis?
How should you treat commotio cordis?	In this situation, the ventricular fibrillation that occurs from this injury responds well to early defibrillation if provided in the first 2 minutes after injury.
In this situation, the ventricular fibrillation that occurs from this injury responds well to early defibrillation if provided in the first 2 minutes after injury.	How should you treat commotio cordis?
What are the large blood vessels in the chest?	These are the superior vena cava, the inferior vena cava, the pulmonary arteries, four main pulmonary veins, and the aorta.
These are the superior vena cava, the inferior vena cava, the pulmonary arteries, four main pulmonary veins, and the aorta.	What are the large blood vessels in the chest?
What percentage of deaths due to blunt trauma include a transection of the aorta?	20% of deaths due to blunt trauma include this.
20% of deaths due to blunt trauma include this.	What percentage of deaths due to blunt trauma include a transection of the aorta?
How many people die every year as a result of aortic or great vessel rupture?	5,000 to 8,000 people die a year as a result of this.
5,000 to 8,000 people die a year as a result of this.	How many people die every year as a result of aortic or great vessel rupture?
What bone contains the brain?	This is the cranium, or skull, which connects to the spinal cord through the foramen magnum.
This is the cranium, or skull, which connects to the spinal cord through the foramen magnum.	What bone contains the brain?
What are the major bones of the face?	The major bones of this are the: 1) nasal bone 2) the two maxillae (upper jawbones) 3) the two zygomas (cheekbones) 4) the mandibles
The major bones of this are the: 1) nasal bone 2) the two maxillae (upper jawbones) 3) the two zygomas (cheekbones) 4) the mandibles	What are the major bones of the face?
What is the orbit of the eye composed of?	This is composed of the lower edge of the frontal bone of the skull, the zygoma, the maxilla, and the nasal bone.
This is composed of the lower edge of the frontal bone of the skull, the zygoma, the maxilla, and the nasal bone.	What is the orbit of the eye composed of?
How much of the nose is formed by bone?	Only the proximal third of this is formed by bone; the rest is composed of cartilage.
Only the proximal third of this is formed by bone; the rest is composed of cartilage.	How much of the nose is formed by bone?
What is the external, visible part of the ear called?	This is called the pinna.
This is called the pinna.	What is the external, visible part of the ear called?
What is the small, rounded, fleshy bulge immediately anterior to the canal?	This is called the tragus.
This is called the tragus.	What is the small, rounded, fleshy bulge immediately anterior to the canal?
Where can the superficial temporal artery be palpated?	This can be palpated just anterior to the tragus.
This can be palpated just anterior to the tragus.	Where can the superficial temporal artery be palpated?
What is mastoid process?	"This is a prominent bony mass at the base of the skull, about 1"" posterior to the external opening of the ear."
"This is a prominent bony mass at the base of the skull, about 1"" posterior to the external opening of the ear."	What is mastoid process?
How many teeth are in the human mouth?	There are 32 of these in the mouth.
There are 32 of these in the mouth.	How many teeth are in the human mouth?
What is the cervical spine?	This is the first seven vertebrae in the spinal column (C1 through C7).
This is the first seven vertebrae in the spinal column (C1 through C7).	What is the cervical spine?
Where are the carotid arteries found?	These are found on either side of the trachea, along with the jugular veins and several nerves.
These are found on either side of the trachea, along with the jugular veins and several nerves.	Where are the carotid arteries found?
What is between the thyroid cartilage and the cricoid cartilage in the middle of the neck?	Between these two is the cricothyroid membrane, a thin sheet of fascia.
Between these two is the cricothyroid membrane, a thin sheet of fascia.	What is between the thyroid cartilage and the cricoid cartilage in the middle of the neck?
Where can the carotid arteries be easily palpable?	These can be easily palpated in a groove 1 to 2 cm lateral to the larynx.
These can be easily palpated in a groove 1 to 2 cm lateral to the larynx.	Where can the carotid arteries be easily palpable?
What are the sternocleidomastoid muscles?	These are muscles that originate from the mastoid process of the cranium and insert into the medial border each collarbone and the sternum at the base of the neck; they allow movement of the head.
These are muscles that originate from the mastoid process of the cranium and insert into the medial border each collarbone and the sternum at the base of the neck; they allow movement of the head.	What are the sternocleidomastoid muscles?
How big is the eye?	"This is approximately 1"" in diameter."
"This is approximately 1"" in diameter."	How big is the eye?
How much of an adult eye globe is protected by the orbit?	80% of this is protected by the orbit.
80% of this is protected by the orbit.	How much of an adult eye globe is protected by the orbit?
What is the conjunctiva?	This is a membrane which covers the exposed surface of the eye and the inner surface of the eyelids.
This is a membrane which covers the exposed surface of the eye and the inner surface of the eyelids.	What is the conjunctiva?
What are the lacrimal glands?	These are tear glands that keep the eye moist.
These are tear glands that keep the eye moist.	What are the lacrimal glands?
What is the sclera?	This is the white of the eye, an extremely tough fibrous tissue.
This is the white of the eye, an extremely tough fibrous tissue.	What is the sclera?
What is the cornea?	This is a clear, transparent membrane which allows light to enter the eye.
This is a clear, transparent membrane which allows light to enter the eye.	What is the cornea?
What is the iris?	This is a circular muscle that lies behind the cornea with an opening in its center that allows light to enter. It is pigmented.
This is a circular muscle that lies behind the cornea with an opening in its center that allows light to enter. It is pigmented.	What is the iris?
What is the pupil?	This is the opening in the center of the iris.
This is the opening in the center of the iris.	What is the pupil?
What is anisocoria?	This is a congenitial condition in which people are born with unequal pupils.
This is a congenitial condition in which people are born with unequal pupils.	What is anisocoria?
What is the lens?	This is behind the iris, and focuses images on the retina.
This is behind the iris, and focuses images on the retina.	What is the lens?
What is the retina?	This is in the back of the globe, and has numerous nerve endings which respond to light.
This is in the back of the globe, and has numerous nerve endings which respond to light.	What is the retina?
What is retinal detachment?	This is a condition when the retina detaches from the underlying choroid and sclera, thus its nerve endings are not nourished, and the patient experiences blindness.
This is a condition when the retina detaches from the underlying choroid and sclera, thus its nerve endings are not nourished, and the patient experiences blindness.	What is retinal detachment?
What is an important consideration for face and neck injury patient's airway?	In this situation, bleeding from the injuries can be very heavy and produce large clots in the upper airway. In addition, the injuries may cause loosened teeth or dentures to become dislodged into the throat.
In this situation, bleeding from the injuries can be very heavy and produce large clots in the upper airway. In addition, the injuries may cause loosened teeth or dentures to become dislodged into the throat.	What is an important consideration for face and neck injury patient's airway?
What is a hemotoma?	This is a blunt injury that deos not break the skin but causes a break in a blood vessel, lead blood to collect under the skin.
This is a blunt injury that deos not break the skin but causes a break in a blood vessel, lead blood to collect under the skin.	What is a hemotoma?
What are the signs of a mandibular fracture?	The signs of this include: a misalignment of the teeth, numbness of the chin, and an inability to open the mouth.
The signs of this include: a misalignment of the teeth, numbness of the chin, and an inability to open the mouth.	What are the signs of a mandibular fracture?
When treating a soft-tissues injury to the face and neck, what is important to remember regarding bleeding and the airway?	In this situation, remember that blood draining into the throat can produce vomiting and airway obstruction; therefore, the patient may need frequent suctioning.
In this situation, remember that blood draining into the throat can produce vomiting and airway obstruction; therefore, the patient may need frequent suctioning.	When treating a soft-tissues injury to the face and neck, what is important to remember regarding bleeding and the airway?
What should you do with an injury that exposes the brain, eye, or other structures?	With this injury, cover the exposed parts with a moist, sterile dressing to protect them from further damage.
With this injury, cover the exposed parts with a moist, sterile dressing to protect them from further damage.	What should you do with an injury that exposes the brain, eye, or other structures?
What should you do if you find portions of avulsed skin that have become separated?	With this injury, you should wrap them in a sterile dressing, place them in a plastic bag, and keep them cool.
With this injury, you should wrap them in a sterile dressing, place them in a plastic bag, and keep them cool.	What should you do if you find portions of avulsed skin that have become separated?
What is conjunctivitis?	This is when a small foreign object produces severe irritation, making the conjunctiva inflamed and red. Use a normal saline solution to gently irrigate the eye.
This is when a small foreign object produces severe irritation, making the conjunctiva inflamed and red. Use a normal saline solution to gently irrigate the eye.	What is conjunctivitis?
When irrigating the eye, what should you remember?	When doing this, remember to always flush towards the outside, to avoid flushing material into the other eye.
When doing this, remember to always flush towards the outside, to avoid flushing material into the other eye.	When irrigating the eye, what should you remember?
What should you never do if an object is stuck in the cornea?	In this situation, never attempt to remove the object.
In this situation, never attempt to remove the object.	What should you never do if an object is stuck in the cornea?
What should you do when you see or suspect an impaled object in the eye?	In this situation, bandage both eyes with soft bulky dressings to prevent further injury.
In this situation, bandage both eyes with soft bulky dressings to prevent further injury.	What should you do when you see or suspect an impaled object in the eye?
What should you do if an eye was burned by an alkali or strong acid?	In this situation, you hsould irrigate the eye continuously for 20 minutes.
In this situation, you hsould irrigate the eye continuously for 20 minutes.	What should you do if an eye was burned by an alkali or strong acid?
What can cause superficial light burns on the eye?	These can be caused by ultraviolet rays from an arc welding unit, light from prolonged exposure to a sunlamp, or reflected light from a bright snow-covered area. These injuries often become painful 3 to 5 hours after exposure.
These can be caused by ultraviolet rays from an arc welding unit, light from prolonged exposure to a sunlamp, or reflected light from a bright snow-covered area. These injuries often become painful 3 to 5 hours after exposure.	What can cause superficial light burns on the eye?
What are the 3 important guidelines to follow when treating penetrating eye injuries?	The 3 guidelines for this situation are: 1) Never exert pressure on or manipulate it in any way. 2) If any part of the eye is exposed, gently apply a moist, sterile dressing to prevent drying. 3) Cover the injured eye with a protective metal eye shield, cup, or sterile dressing.
The 3 guidelines for this situation are: 1) Never exert pressure on or manipulate it in any way. 2) If any part of the eye is exposed, gently apply a moist, sterile dressing to prevent drying. 3) Cover the injured eye with a protective metal eye shield, cup, or sterile dressing.	What are the 3 important guidelines to follow when treating penetrating eye injuries?
What should you do if the eyeball is displaced out of its socket?	In this situation, do NOT attempt to reposition it. Simply cover it and stabilize it with a moist, sterile dressing.
In this situation, do NOT attempt to reposition it. Simply cover it and stabilize it with a moist, sterile dressing.	What should you do if the eyeball is displaced out of its socket?
What is a hyphema?	This is bleeding into the anterior chamber of the eye that obscures part or all of the eye; common in blunt trauma.
This is bleeding into the anterior chamber of the eye that obscures part or all of the eye; common in blunt trauma.	What is a hyphema?
What is a blowout fracture, and how should you treat it?	This is a fracture of the orbit, particularly of the bones that support the globe. Pain, double vision, and/or decreased vision are symptoms. Protect the eyes, cover, and promptly transport.
This is a fracture of the orbit, particularly of the bones that support the globe. Pain, double vision, and/or decreased vision are symptoms. Protect the eyes, cover, and promptly transport.	What is a blowout fracture, and how should you treat it?
What is epistaxis?	This is another name for nosebleeds.
This is another name for nosebleeds.	What is epistaxis?
When should you remove contact lense?	The ONLY time you should remove these is in the case of chemical burns in the eye.
The ONLY time you should remove these is in the case of chemical burns in the eye.	When should you remove contact lense?
What eye findings should alert you to the possibility of a head injury?	These findings are: One pupil larger than the other; The eyes not moving together or pointing in different directions; Failure of the eyes to follow the movement of your finger as instructed; Bleeding under the conjunctiva, which obscures the sclera; Protrusion or bulging of one eye.
These findings are: One pupil larger than the other; The eyes not moving together or pointing in different directions; Failure of the eyes to follow the movement of your finger as instructed; Bleeding under the conjunctiva, which obscures the sclera; Protrusion or bulging of one eye.	What eye findings should alert you to the possibility of a head injury?
What are turbinates?	These are layers of bone which are covered with a moist lining. Both chambers have a superior, middle, and inferior.
These are layers of bone which are covered with a moist lining. Both chambers have a superior, middle, and inferior.	What are turbinates?
What is the external auditory canal?	This is the ear canal, and leads into the tympanic membrane, or eardrum.
This is the ear canal, and leads into the tympanic membrane, or eardrum.	What is the external auditory canal?
What is the tympanic membrane?	This is also called the eardrum, and lies between the external and middle ear.
This is also called the eardrum, and lies between the external and middle ear.	What is the tympanic membrane?
What bones are in the middle ear?	The three bones here are called: 1) the hammer 2) the anvil 3) the stirrup
The three bones here are called: 1) the hammer 2) the anvil 3) the stirrup	What bones are in the middle ear?
What is the eustachian tube?	This is the internal auditory canal, which connects the middle ear to the nasal cavity.
This is the internal auditory canal, which connects the middle ear to the nasal cavity.	What is the eustachian tube?
How many days after an injury can surgeons repair facial deformities?	These damages can usually be reversed if treated within 7 to 10 days.
These damages can usually be reversed if treated within 7 to 10 days.	How many days after an injury can surgeons repair facial deformities?
What should you remember when dealing with an avulsed tooth?	With this injury, remember to handle it by the crown and not by the root.
With this injury, remember to handle it by the crown and not by the root.	What should you remember when dealing with an avulsed tooth?
What is subcutaneous emphysema?	This is the presence of air in the soft tissues which produces a characteristic crackling sensation. If you feel this sensation, maintain airway and prodive immediate transport.
This is the presence of air in the soft tissues which produces a characteristic crackling sensation. If you feel this sensation, maintain airway and prodive immediate transport.	What is subcutaneous emphysema?
What is exsanguination?	This is the the bleeding out of the body.
This is the the bleeding out of the body.	What is exsanguination?
What is an air embolism?	This often occurs if a vein has been punctured, causing air to be sucked in through to the heart; cardiac arrest is a serious threat.
This often occurs if a vein has been punctured, causing air to be sucked in through to the heart; cardiac arrest is a serious threat.	What is an air embolism?
What are the signs and symptoms of larynx injuries?	The signs and symptoms of this include: respiratory distress; hoarseness; pain; difficulty swallowing (aka dysphagia); cyanosis; pale skin; sputum in the wound; subcutaneous emphysema; bruising on the neck; hematoma; and bleeding
The signs and symptoms of this include: respiratory distress; hoarseness; pain; difficulty swallowing (aka dysphagia); cyanosis; pale skin; sputum in the wound; subcutaneous emphysema; bruising on the neck; hematoma; and bleeding	What are the signs and symptoms of larynx injuries?
What is a result of larnygeal injuries?	When this happens, the larynx becomes crushed against the cervical spine, resulting in soft-tissue injury, fractures, and/or separation of the fascia that connects the thyroid and cricoid cartilages.
When this happens, the larynx becomes crushed against the cervical spine, resulting in soft-tissue injury, fractures, and/or separation of the fascia that connects the thyroid and cricoid cartilages.	What is a result of larnygeal injuries?
How should you treat laryngeal injuries?	With these injuries, provide oxygenation and ventilation. Always suspect cervical spine injury, so apply immobilization but avoid the use of rigid collars, as they may cause further damage to the soft tissues.
With these injuries, provide oxygenation and ventilation. Always suspect cervical spine injury, so apply immobilization but avoid the use of rigid collars, as they may cause further damage to the soft tissues.	How should you treat laryngeal injuries?
What causes barotrauma injuries?	These injuries occur from sudden or extreme changes in air pressure.
These injuries occur from sudden or extreme changes in air pressure.	What causes barotrauma injuries?
What is the leading form of injury?	This is soft-tissue trauma.
This is soft-tissue trauma.	What is the leading form of injury?
How many ED (Emergency Department) visits each year are open wound related?	Approximately 6.5 million visits are a result of these.
Approximately 6.5 million visits are a result of these.	How many ED (Emergency Department) visits each year are open wound related?
How many ED visits each year are a result of contusions?	Approximately 5 million visits are a result of these.
Approximately 5 million visits are a result of these.	How many ED visits each year are a result of contusions?
What is the largest organ in the body?	It is the skin.
It is the skin.	What is the largest organ in the body?
What is the epidermis?	This is the tough, external layer that forms a watertight covering for the body. It is itself composed of several layers.
This is the tough, external layer that forms a watertight covering for the body. It is itself composed of several layers.	What is the epidermis?
What is the dermis?	This is the inner layer of the skin. It lies below the germinal cells of the epidermis. It contains the structures that give the skin its characteristic appearances: hair follicles, sweat glands, and sebaceous glands.
This is the inner layer of the skin. It lies below the germinal cells of the epidermis. It contains the structures that give the skin its characteristic appearances: hair follicles, sweat glands, and sebaceous glands.	What is the dermis?
What are mucous membranes?	These are membranes that cover the openings in the body (mouth, nose, anus, vagina) and also provide a protective barrier against bacterial invasion.
These are membranes that cover the openings in the body (mouth, nose, anus, vagina) and also provide a protective barrier against bacterial invasion.	What are mucous membranes?
What functions does the skin serve?	This serves several functions, including: protecting the body from foreign pathogens; and assisting in body temperature regulation.
This serves several functions, including: protecting the body from foreign pathogens; and assisting in body temperature regulation.	What functions does the skin serve?
What are the three types of soft tissue injuries?	The three types are: 1) Closed injuries 2) Open Injuries 3) Burns
The three types are: 1) Closed injuries 2) Open Injuries 3) Burns	What are the three types of soft tissue injuries?
What are closed injuries?	These are when soft-tissue damage occurs beneath the skin or mucous membrane but the surface of the skin or membrane remains intact.
These are when soft-tissue damage occurs beneath the skin or mucous membrane but the surface of the skin or membrane remains intact.	What are closed injuries?
What are open injuries?	These are when there is a break in the surface of the skin or the mucous membranes, exposing deeper tissues to potential contamination.
These are when there is a break in the surface of the skin or the mucous membranes, exposing deeper tissues to potential contamination.	What are open injuries?
What are burns?	These are when the soft tissue damage occurs as a result from thermal heat, frictional heat, toxic chemicals, electricity, or nuclear radiation.
These are when the soft tissue damage occurs as a result from thermal heat, frictional heat, toxic chemicals, electricity, or nuclear radiation.	What are burns?
What does histamine do during inflammation?	"During inflammation, this causes dilation of blood vessels, increasing blood flow to the injured area and resulting in a reddened, warm area immediately around the site. It also makes capillaries more permeable, and swelling may occur as fluid seeps out of these ""leaky"" capillaries."
"During inflammation, this causes dilation of blood vessels, increasing blood flow to the injured area and resulting in a reddened, warm area immediately around the site. It also makes capillaries more permeable, and swelling may occur as fluid seeps out of these ""leaky"" capillaries."	What does histamine do during inflammation?
What is collagen, and what does it do during the wound healing process?	This is a tough, fibrous protein found in scar tissue, hair, bones, and connective tissue. In the last stage of wound healing, it provides stability to the damaged tissue and joins wound borders, thereby closing the open tissue.
This is a tough, fibrous protein found in scar tissue, hair, bones, and connective tissue. In the last stage of wound healing, it provides stability to the damaged tissue and joins wound borders, thereby closing the open tissue.	What is collagen, and what does it do during the wound healing process?
At what temperature can thermal burns occur?	These can occur when skin is exposed to temperatures higher than 111 F (44 C).
These can occur when skin is exposed to temperatures higher than 111 F (44 C).	At what temperature can thermal burns occur?
Why do solids typically cause a more significant burn than gases?	This is because solids generally have higher heat content than gases.
This is because solids generally have higher heat content than gases.	Why do solids typically cause a more significant burn than gases?
What is a contusion (bruise)?	This is an injury that causes bleeding beneath the skin but does not break the skin.
This is an injury that causes bleeding beneath the skin but does not break the skin.	What is a contusion (bruise)?
What is ecchymosis?	This is the buildup of blood which produces a characteristic blue or black discoloration.
This is the buildup of blood which produces a characteristic blue or black discoloration.	What is ecchymosis?
What is a hematoma?	This is blood that has collected within damaged tissue or in a body cavity; it occurs whenever a large blood vessel is damaged and bleed rapidly.
This is blood that has collected within damaged tissue or in a body cavity; it occurs whenever a large blood vessel is damaged and bleed rapidly.	What is a hematoma?
What is a crushing injury?	This occurs when a great amount of force is applied to the body.
This occurs when a great amount of force is applied to the body.	What is a crushing injury?
What is crush syndrome?	This is when an area of the body is trapped for longer than 4 hours and arterial blood flow is compromised; this is a significant metabolic derangement that can lead to renal failure and death.
This is when an area of the body is trapped for longer than 4 hours and arterial blood flow is compromised; this is a significant metabolic derangement that can lead to renal failure and death.	What is crush syndrome?
What is compartment syndrome?	This is a condition when the cells that are injured leak watery fluid into the spaces between the cells. The pressure of the fluid may become great enough to compress the tissue and cause further damage. This is especially true if the blood vessels become compressed, cutting off blood flow to the tissue.
This is a condition when the cells that are injured leak watery fluid into the spaces between the cells. The pressure of the fluid may become great enough to compress the tissue and cause further damage. This is especially true if the blood vessels become compressed, cutting off blood flow to the tissue.	What is compartment syndrome?
What is contamination?	This is the presence of infectious organisms (pathogens) or foreign bodies, such as dirt, gravel, or metal, in the wound.
This is the presence of infectious organisms (pathogens) or foreign bodies, such as dirt, gravel, or metal, in the wound.	What is contamination?
What are the four types of open sot-tissue wounds?	These are: 1) Abrasions 2) Lacerations 3) Avulsions and 4) Penetrating wounds
These are: 1) Abrasions 2) Lacerations 3) Avulsions and 4) Penetrating wounds	What are the four types of open sot-tissue wounds?
What is an abrasion?	This is a wound of the superficial layer of the skin, caused by friction when a body part rubs or scrapes across a rough or hard surface.
This is a wound of the superficial layer of the skin, caused by friction when a body part rubs or scrapes across a rough or hard surface.	What is an abrasion?
What is a laceration?	This is a jagged cut caused by a sharp object or a blunt force that tears the tissue.
This is a jagged cut caused by a sharp object or a blunt force that tears the tissue.	What is a laceration?
What is an incision?	This is a sharp, smooth cut.
This is a sharp, smooth cut.	What is an incision?
What is an avulsion?	This is an injury that separates various layers of soft tissue (usually between the subcutaneous layer and fascia) so that they become either completely detached or hang as a flap.
This is an injury that separates various layers of soft tissue (usually between the subcutaneous layer and fascia) so that they become either completely detached or hang as a flap.	What is an avulsion?
What should you never do with avulsions?	In this situation, NEVER remove the skin flap, regardless of size.
In this situation, NEVER remove the skin flap, regardless of size.	What should you never do with avulsions?
What is an amputation?	This is an injury in which part of the body is completely severed.
This is an injury in which part of the body is completely severed.	What is an amputation?
What is a penetrating wound (puncture wound)?	This is an injury resulting from a sharp, pointed object, such as a knife, ice pick, splinter, or bullet.
This is an injury resulting from a sharp, pointed object, such as a knife, ice pick, splinter, or bullet.	What is a penetrating wound (puncture wound)?
What should you consider any time you observe bruising, swelling, or deformity, or the patient is reporting pain?	In these situations, always consider the possibility of a closed injury.
In these situations, always consider the possibility of a closed injury.	What should you consider any time you observe bruising, swelling, or deformity, or the patient is reporting pain?
What does RICES stand for when treating soft-tissue injuries?	When treating these, it stands for: R.est I.ce C.ompression E.levation S.plinting
When treating these, it stands for: R.est I.ce C.ompression E.levation S.plinting	What does RICES stand for when treating soft-tissue injuries?
When should you clean an open wound?	Never; only hospital personnel should clean this.
Never; only hospital personnel should clean this.	When should you clean an open wound?
What is a way to better control bleeding?	You can often better control this by splinting the extremity, even if there is no fracture.
You can often better control this by splinting the extremity, even if there is no fracture.	What is a way to better control bleeding?
What is evisceration, and what should you do when faced with it?	This is when organs protrude through a wound. Do not touch or move the exposed organs; cover the wound with sterile gauze moistened with sterile saline solution and secure with an occlusive dressing; if you do not suspect spinal injury, flex the uninjured legs to relieve pressure.
This is when organs protrude through a wound. Do not touch or move the exposed organs; cover the wound with sterile gauze moistened with sterile saline solution and secure with an occlusive dressing; if you do not suspect spinal injury, flex the uninjured legs to relieve pressure.	What is evisceration, and what should you do when faced with it?
What is the only exception to the rule of never removing an impaled object?	The only exception to this rule is when it interferes with CPR.
The only exception to this rule is when it interferes with CPR.	What is the only exception to the rule of never removing an impaled object?
How many deaths a year are attributed to burns?	These account for more than 10,000 deaths a year.
These account for more than 10,000 deaths a year.	How many deaths a year are attributed to burns?
Why are burns to the airway of significant importance?	These are of significant importance because the loose mucosa in the hypopharynx can swell and lead to complete airway obstruction.
These are of significant importance because the loose mucosa in the hypopharynx can swell and lead to complete airway obstruction.	Why are burns to the airway of significant importance?
What five factors will help you determine the severity of a burn?	These are: [MOST IMPORTANT] 1) What is the depth of the burn? 2) What is the extent of the burn?   3) Are any critical areas involved? 4) Does the patient have any preexisting medical conditions or other injuries? 5) Is the patient younger than 5 or older than 55?
These are: [MOST IMPORTANT] 1) What is the depth of the burn? 2) What is the extent of the burn?   3) Are any critical areas involved? 4) Does the patient have any preexisting medical conditions or other injuries? 5) Is the patient younger than 5 or older than 55?	What five factors will help you determine the severity of a burn?
What are the 3 types of burns?	They are: 1) Superficial (1st degree) burns 2) Partial Thickness (2nd degree) burns 3) Full Thickness (3rd degree) burns
They are: 1) Superficial (1st degree) burns 2) Partial Thickness (2nd degree) burns 3) Full Thickness (3rd degree) burns	What are the 3 types of burns?
What are superficial (1st degree) burns?	These involve only the top layer of skin (epidermis). The skin turns red but does not blister or actually burn through (ie sunburn).
These involve only the top layer of skin (epidermis). The skin turns red but does not blister or actually burn through (ie sunburn).	What are superficial (1st degree) burns?
What is a partial-thickness burn?	These involve the epidermis and some portion of the dermis. These burns do not destroy the entire thickness of the skin, nor is the subcutaneous tissue injured. Typically, the skin is moist mottled and white to red. Blisters are present. They cause intense pain.
These involve the epidermis and some portion of the dermis. These burns do not destroy the entire thickness of the skin, nor is the subcutaneous tissue injured. Typically, the skin is moist mottled and white to red. Blisters are present. They cause intense pain.	What is a partial-thickness burn?
What is a full-thickness burn?	These extend through all the skin layers and may involve subcutaneous layers, muscle, bone, or internal organs. The burned area is dry and leathery and may appear white, dark brown, or even charred. The burn area may be painless due to the death of nerve endings.
These extend through all the skin layers and may involve subcutaneous layers, muscle, bone, or internal organs. The burned area is dry and leathery and may appear white, dark brown, or even charred. The burn area may be painless due to the death of nerve endings.	What is a full-thickness burn?
What is the rule of nines?	This is a method to estimate burn surface area, using the patient's palm, which is equal to roughly 1% of the patient's total body. Chest=18% Legs=18% each Arms=9% each Genitals=1% Back=18% Head=9%
This is a method to estimate burn surface area, using the patient's palm, which is equal to roughly 1% of the patient's total body. Chest=18% Legs=18% each Arms=9% each Genitals=1% Back=18% Head=9%	What is the rule of nines?
How long should you flood a chemical burn for?	You should do this for with gallons of water for 15 to 20 minutes after the patient says the burning pain has stopped.
You should do this for with gallons of water for 15 to 20 minutes after the patient says the burning pain has stopped.	How long should you flood a chemical burn for?
What is an insulator?	This is any substance that prevents an electrical circuit between a source and the ground from being completed.
This is any substance that prevents an electrical circuit between a source and the ground from being completed.	What is an insulator?
What is a conductor?	This is any substance that allows a current to flow through it.
This is any substance that allows a current to flow through it.	What is a conductor?
What is amperage?	This is a measurement of the magnitude of current.
This is a measurement of the magnitude of current.	What is amperage?
When an electric current enters the body, where is it burned?	It is burned at the entrance wound as well as anywhere along the path until the current grounds and exits the body.
It is burned at the entrance wound as well as anywhere along the path until the current grounds and exits the body.	When an electric current enters the body, where is it burned?
What is important to remember about electrical burns?	These are always more severe  than the external signs indicate.
These are always more severe  than the external signs indicate.	What is important to remember about electrical burns?
What a danger regarding electric currents and the chest?	These can cross the chest and cause cardiac arrest.
These can cross the chest and cause cardiac arrest.	What a danger regarding electric currents and the chest?
What are thermal burns?	These are burns caused by heat.
These are burns caused by heat.	What are thermal burns?
What are flame burns?	These are often very deep burns, particularly if a person's clothing catches fire.
These are often very deep burns, particularly if a person's clothing catches fire.	What are flame burns?
What is a scald burn?	These are commonly seen in children and handicapped adults. They often cover a large surface area of the body because liquids spread easily.
These are commonly seen in children and handicapped adults. They often cover a large surface area of the body because liquids spread easily.	What is a scald burn?
What are flash burns?	These are thermals burns caused by an explosion, as well as lightening strikes.
These are thermals burns caused by an explosion, as well as lightening strikes.	What are flash burns?
What should you do if your patient shows signs of edema such as hoarse voice, singed nasal hairs, singed facial hairs, burns of the face, or carbon particles in the sputum?	In these situations, consider requesting for ALS intercept, and apply a cool mist or aerosol therapy (apply ice pack to throat if no mister is available).
In these situations, consider requesting for ALS intercept, and apply a cool mist or aerosol therapy (apply ice pack to throat if no mister is available).	What should you do if your patient shows signs of edema such as hoarse voice, singed nasal hairs, singed facial hairs, burns of the face, or carbon particles in the sputum?
What are occlusive dressings?	These are dressing made of vaseline gauze, aluminium foil, or plastic, which prevent air and liquids from entering or exiting the wound. They are used to cover sucking chest wounds, abdominal eviscerations, and neck injuries.
These are dressing made of vaseline gauze, aluminium foil, or plastic, which prevent air and liquids from entering or exiting the wound. They are used to cover sucking chest wounds, abdominal eviscerations, and neck injuries.	What are occlusive dressings?
Why should you always check a limb distal to a bandage for circulation?	You should do this because any improperly applied bandage that impairs circulation can result in additional tissue damage or even the loss of a limb.
You should do this because any improperly applied bandage that impairs circulation can result in additional tissue damage or even the loss of a limb.	Why should you always check a limb distal to a bandage for circulation?
What should you never do just because a patients skin is not cherry red?	In this situation, you should never rule out CO intoxication.
In this situation, you should never rule out CO intoxication.	What should you never do just because a patients skin is not cherry red?
What is HCN?	This is hydrogen cyanide; it is colorless and has the smell of bitter almonds.
This is hydrogen cyanide; it is colorless and has the smell of bitter almonds.	What is HCN?
What are the signs and symptoms of HCN poisoning?	Signs and symptoms of this involve the central nervous, respiratory, and cardiovascular systems of the body, and include faintness, anxiety, abnormal vital signs, headache, seizures, paralysis, and coma.
Signs and symptoms of this involve the central nervous, respiratory, and cardiovascular systems of the body, and include faintness, anxiety, abnormal vital signs, headache, seizures, paralysis, and coma.	What are the signs and symptoms of HCN poisoning?
Since 1944, how many significant radiation exposures  involving more than 3,000 people have there been?	There have been more than 400 of these incidents since 1944.
There have been more than 400 of these incidents since 1944.	Since 1944, how many significant radiation exposures  involving more than 3,000 people have there been?
What are the three types of ionizing radiation?	These are: 1) Alpha 2) Beta 3) Gamma
These are: 1) Alpha 2) Beta 3) Gamma	What are the three types of ionizing radiation?
What can block beta radiation?	Simple protective clothing designed for this task can stop this form of radiation.
Simple protective clothing designed for this task can stop this form of radiation.	What can block beta radiation?
What is radiation measured in?	It is measured in absorbed dose (rad), aka R.adiation E.quivalent in M.an (r.e.m.)
It is measured in absorbed dose (rad), aka R.adiation E.quivalent in M.an (r.e.m.)	What is radiation measured in?
How many rad equal 1 gray (Gy)?	100 rad equals this.
100 rad equals this.	How many rad equal 1 gray (Gy)?
What is the average human exposure from background radiation per year?	This is 0.36 rem
This is 0.36 rem	What is the average human exposure from background radiation per year?
At what level can mild radiation sickness be expected?	This can be expected at exposure between 1 and 2 Gy.
This can be expected at exposure between 1 and 2 Gy.	At what level can mild radiation sickness be expected?
At what level can moderate radiation sickness be expected?	This can be expected at exposure between 2 and 5 Gy.
This can be expected at exposure between 2 and 5 Gy.	At what level can moderate radiation sickness be expected?
At what level can severe radiation sickness be expected?	This can be expected at exposure between 4 and 6 Gy.
This can be expected at exposure between 4 and 6 Gy.	At what level can severe radiation sickness be expected?
What happens when exposed to more than 8 Gy of radiation?	This level of exposure is immedaitely fatal.
This level of exposure is immedaitely fatal.	What happens when exposed to more than 8 Gy of radiation?
How should you manage radiation burns?	In this situation, make sure the patient is decontaminated (ie no debris); irrigate open wounds; antidotes may help bind an isotopem enhance its elimination from the body, or reduce the toxic effects on other organs.
In this situation, make sure the patient is decontaminated (ie no debris); irrigate open wounds; antidotes may help bind an isotopem enhance its elimination from the body, or reduce the toxic effects on other organs.	How should you manage radiation burns?
What is the most common cause of shock following trauma?	Bleeding is the most common cause of this after trauma.
Bleeding is the most common cause of this after trauma.	What is the most common cause of shock following trauma?
How long can cells in the brain, spinal column, and heart live without blood?	These can only survive for no more than a few minutes without blood.
These can only survive for no more than a few minutes without blood.	How long can cells in the brain, spinal column, and heart live without blood?
How long can cells in organs such as the kidneys and lungs survive without blood?	These cells can survive for almost an hour without blood.
These cells can survive for almost an hour without blood.	How long can cells in organs such as the kidneys and lungs survive without blood?
How long can skeletal muscle cells survive without blood?	These can survive for 2 hours without blood.
These can survive for 2 hours without blood.	How long can skeletal muscle cells survive without blood?
What are the 3 main parts of the cardiovascular system?	These 3 parts are: 1) The pump (heart) 2) Containers (blood vessels that reach every cell in the body) 3) Fluid (Blood and body fluids)
These 3 parts are: 1) The pump (heart) 2) Containers (blood vessels that reach every cell in the body) 3) Fluid (Blood and body fluids)	What are the 3 main parts of the cardiovascular system?
What does the heart and its muscles absolutely need at all times to function?	This requires a rich and well-dsitributed blood supply to function.
This requires a rich and well-dsitributed blood supply to function.	What does the heart and its muscles absolutely need at all times to function?
From where does blood enter the right atrium?	Blood enters here from the vena cava.
Blood enters here from the vena cava.	From where does blood enter the right atrium?
Where does the blood go as the right ventricle contracts?	From there, the blood flows into the pulmonary artery and the pulmonary circulation.
From there, the blood flows into the pulmonary artery and the pulmonary circulation.	Where does the blood go as the right ventricle contracts?
Through what does oxygenated blood return to the left atrium?	The blood returns to here through the pulmonary veins.
The blood returns to here through the pulmonary veins.	Through what does oxygenated blood return to the left atrium?
Why is the left side of the heart more muscular than the right?	This side of the heart is more muscular because it must pump blood into the aorta and on to the arteries throughout the body.
This side of the heart is more muscular because it must pump blood into the aorta and on to the arteries throughout the body.	Why is the left side of the heart more muscular than the right?
Which chamber is responsible for providing 100% of the body with oxygen-rich blood?	The left ventricle is responsible for all of this.
The left ventricle is responsible for all of this.	Which chamber is responsible for providing 100% of the body with oxygen-rich blood?
What are the five types of blood vessels?	These are: 1) Arteries 2) Arterioles 3) Capillaries 4) Venules 5) Veins
These are: 1) Arteries 2) Arterioles 3) Capillaries 4) Venules 5) Veins	What are the five types of blood vessels?
Where does blood pass into as it leaves the left ventricle?	It passes into the aorta, the largest artery in the body.
It passes into the aorta, the largest artery in the body.	Where does blood pass into as it leaves the left ventricle?
What are arterioles?	These are smaller vessels that connect the arteries and capillaries.
These are smaller vessels that connect the arteries and capillaries.	What are arterioles?
What are capillaries?	These are small tubes, with the diamter of a single red blood cell, that pass among all the cells in the body, linking the arterioles and the venules.
These are small tubes, with the diamter of a single red blood cell, that pass among all the cells in the body, linking the arterioles and the venules.	What are capillaries?
What are venules?	These are small, thin-walled vessels that connect the capillaries with the veins.
These are small, thin-walled vessels that connect the capillaries with the veins.	What are venules?
What are veins?	These are blood vessels that return blood to the heart (usually through the vena cava)
These are blood vessels that return blood to the heart (usually through the vena cava)	What are veins?
What are platelets?	These are found in the blood and are responsible for forming blood clots.
These are found in the blood and are responsible for forming blood clots.	What are platelets?
What is fibrinogen?	This is a substance in the body that reinforces clumping red blood cells, helping to form a clot.
This is a substance in the body that reinforces clumping red blood cells, helping to form a clot.	What is fibrinogen?
What is one thing the autonomic nervous system does during emergencies?	This automatically redirects blood away from other organs to the heart, brain, lungs, and kidneys.
This automatically redirects blood away from other organs to the heart, brain, lungs, and kidneys.	What is one thing the autonomic nervous system does during emergencies?
How fast must blood pass through the cardiovascular system?	This must pass through the system at a speed that is fast enough to maintain adequate circulation throughout the body and slow enough to allow each cell time to exchange oxygen and nutrients for carbon dioxide and other waste products.
This must pass through the system at a speed that is fast enough to maintain adequate circulation throughout the body and slow enough to allow each cell time to exchange oxygen and nutrients for carbon dioxide and other waste products.	How fast must blood pass through the cardiovascular system?
When does one require a minimal blood supply?	When one is asleep is a good example of this.
When one is asleep is a good example of this.	When does one require a minimal blood supply?
When does the gastrointestinal tract require a high flow of blood?	It requires a high flow after a meal.
It requires a high flow after a meal.	When does the gastrointestinal tract require a high flow of blood?
When may an organ or tissue be better able to resist damage from hypoperfusion?	In this situation, considerably colder temperatures may help resist damage.
In this situation, considerably colder temperatures may help resist damage.	When may an organ or tissue be better able to resist damage from hypoperfusion?
What is hemorrhage?	This another word for bleeding.
This another word for bleeding.	What is hemorrhage?
What are some signs and symptoms of hypovolemic shock?	These signs include: Rapid, weak pulse; Changes in mental status (AMS); Cool, clammy skin; cyanosis; low blood pressure (late sign).
These signs include: Rapid, weak pulse; Changes in mental status (AMS); Cool, clammy skin; cyanosis; low blood pressure (late sign).	What are some signs and symptoms of hypovolemic shock?
Up to what percentage of total blood volume loss can the body tolerate?	The body can not tolerate an acute loss of this greater than 20%.
The body can not tolerate an acute loss of this greater than 20%.	Up to what percentage of total blood volume loss can the body tolerate?
How much blood does the average person have per kilogram of body weight?	The average person has 70ml of this per kilogram.
The average person has 70ml of this per kilogram.	How much blood does the average person have per kilogram of body weight?
Appromixately how much blood does a person weighing 80 kg (175 lbs.) have	A person weighing this much has approximately 6 L (10-12 pints) of blood.
A person weighing this much has approximately 6 L (10-12 pints) of blood.	Appromixately how much blood does a person weighing 80 kg (175 lbs.) have
At what level of blood loss will a typical adult experience significant changes in vital signs, including increasing heart rate, increasing respiratory rates, and decreasing blood pressure?	A typical adult will experience these changes if they lose more than 1 L (2 pints) of blood.
A typical adult will experience these changes if they lose more than 1 L (2 pints) of blood.	At what level of blood loss will a typical adult experience significant changes in vital signs, including increasing heart rate, increasing respiratory rates, and decreasing blood pressure?
How much total blood volume does a 1 year old infant have?	They have a total blood volume of only 800 mL.
They have a total blood volume of only 800 mL.	How much total blood volume does a 1 year old infant have?
At what level of blood loss will significant symptoms appear in 1 year old infants?	Significant symptoms will occur in them after only 100 to 200 mL of blood loss (a soft drink can holds 355 mL)
Significant symptoms will occur in them after only 100 to 200 mL of blood loss (a soft drink can holds 355 mL)	At what level of blood loss will significant symptoms appear in 1 year old infants?
How much is 1 unit of blood?	This is 500 mL of blood.
This is 500 mL of blood.	How much is 1 unit of blood?
What are the characteristics of arterial bleeding?	Typically, this kind of bleeding results in brighter red blood (high in oxygen) and spurts in time with the pulse.
Typically, this kind of bleeding results in brighter red blood (high in oxygen) and spurts in time with the pulse.	What are the characteristics of arterial bleeding?
What are the characteristics of venous bleeding?	This kind of bleeding results in blood that is darker (lower in oxygen) and flows slowly or severely, depending on the size.
This kind of bleeding results in blood that is darker (lower in oxygen) and flows slowly or severely, depending on the size.	What are the characteristics of venous bleeding?
On its own, how quickly does manageable bleeding stop itself?	On its own, internal mechanisms can stop this within about 10 minutes.
On its own, internal mechanisms can stop this within about 10 minutes.	On its own, how quickly does manageable bleeding stop itself?
What is vasoconstriction?	This is a narrowing of blood vessels, a possible response to bleeding.
This is a narrowing of blood vessels, a possible response to bleeding.	What is vasoconstriction?
What is coagulation?	This is a process whereby clots form and seal injured portions of the blood vessel.
This is a process whereby clots form and seal injured portions of the blood vessel.	What is coagulation?
What can interfere with clotting?	A number of medications, including aspirin, can interfere with this.
A number of medications, including aspirin, can interfere with this.	What can interfere with clotting?
What is one common cause of severe internal blood loss?	Broken bones, and especially broken ribs, may cause this.
Broken bones, and especially broken ribs, may cause this.	What is one common cause of severe internal blood loss?
What can easily result in the loss of 1 L or more of internal bleeding?	A broken femur can result in this amount of internal bleeding into the thigh.
A broken femur can result in this amount of internal bleeding into the thigh.	What can easily result in the loss of 1 L or more of internal bleeding?
What are some of the only signs of internal bleeding?	Sometimes the only signs of this are local swelling and bruising.
Sometimes the only signs of this are local swelling and bruising.	What are some of the only signs of internal bleeding?
What is one way to assist the body's clotting process?	Keeping the patient's body as still and quiet as possible will aid in this process.
Keeping the patient's body as still and quiet as possible will aid in this process.	What is one way to assist the body's clotting process?
At least how long should you hold uninterrupted pressure on an external wound to stop the bleeding?	You should hold uninterrupted pressure here for at least 5 minutes.
You should hold uninterrupted pressure here for at least 5 minutes.	At least how long should you hold uninterrupted pressure on an external wound to stop the bleeding?
What are some methods to control external bleeding?	These methods are: Direct, even pressure and elevation; pressure dressings and/or splints; tourniquets
These methods are: Direct, even pressure and elevation; pressure dressings and/or splints; tourniquets	What are some methods to control external bleeding?
What blood pressure should alert you to the presence of hypoperfusion?	A systolic blood pressure of less than 100 mm Hg with a weak, rapid pulse should suggest this to you.
A systolic blood pressure of less than 100 mm Hg with a weak, rapid pulse should suggest this to you.	What blood pressure should alert you to the presence of hypoperfusion?
What are common potential bleeding sources for a fall from a ladder striking the head?	A common potential internal bleeding source for this MOI are head injury and hematoma.
A common potential internal bleeding source for this MOI are head injury and hematoma.	What are common potential bleeding sources for a fall from a ladder striking the head?
What are common potential bleeding sources for a fall from a ladder striking the extremities?	A common potential internal bleeding source for this MOI are possible fractures or the possibility of chest injury
A common potential internal bleeding source for this MOI are possible fractures or the possibility of chest injury	What are common potential bleeding sources for a fall from a ladder striking the extremities?
What are common potential bleeding sources for a child struck by a car?	A common potential internal bleeding source for this MOI are head trauma, chest and abdominal pain, or leg fractures.
A common potential internal bleeding source for this MOI are head trauma, chest and abdominal pain, or leg fractures.	What are common potential bleeding sources for a child struck by a car?
What are common potential bleeding sources for a fall on an outstreched arm?	A common potential internal bleeding source for this MOI are possible broken bones or joint injury.
A common potential internal bleeding source for this MOI are possible broken bones or joint injury.	What are common potential bleeding sources for a fall on an outstreched arm?
What are common potential bleeding sources for a child thrown or falling from a great height?	A common potential internal bleeding source for this MOI are head injury, owing to their top-heaviness.
A common potential internal bleeding source for this MOI are head injury, owing to their top-heaviness.	What are common potential bleeding sources for a child thrown or falling from a great height?
What are common potential bleeding sources for an unrestrained driver in a head-on collision?	A common potential internal bleeding source for this MOI are head and neck, chest, abdomen injuries, as well as knee, femur, hip, and pelvis injuries.
A common potential internal bleeding source for this MOI are head and neck, chest, abdomen injuries, as well as knee, femur, hip, and pelvis injuries.	What are common potential bleeding sources for an unrestrained driver in a head-on collision?
What are common potential bleeding sources for an unrestrained front-seat passenger in a side impact collision with intrusion into the vehicle?	A common potential internal bleeding source for this MOI are broken humeruses exposing the chest wall (possible flail chest) and pelvis and acetabulum injuries.
A common potential internal bleeding source for this MOI are broken humeruses exposing the chest wall (possible flail chest) and pelvis and acetabulum injuries.	What are common potential bleeding sources for an unrestrained front-seat passenger in a side impact collision with intrusion into the vehicle?
What are common potential bleeding sources for an unrestrained driver crushed against the steering column?	A common potential internal bleeding source for this MOI are chest and abdomen injuries, ruptured spleen, and neck trauma.
A common potential internal bleeding source for this MOI are chest and abdomen injuries, ruptured spleen, and neck trauma.	What are common potential bleeding sources for an unrestrained driver crushed against the steering column?
What are common potential bleeding sources for a bike injury?	A common potential internal bleeding source for this MOI are fractured clavicles, road rash, and head trauma (esp. if not helmet is present).
A common potential internal bleeding source for this MOI are fractured clavicles, road rash, and head trauma (esp. if not helmet is present).	What are common potential bleeding sources for a bike injury?
What are common potential bleeding sources for an abrupt motorcycle stop?	A common potential internal bleeding source for this MOI are fractured femur and head and neck injuries.
A common potential internal bleeding source for this MOI are fractured femur and head and neck injuries.	What are common potential bleeding sources for an abrupt motorcycle stop?
What are common potential bleeding sources for diving into the shallow end of a swimming pool?	A common potential internal bleeding source for this MOI are head and neck injuries.
A common potential internal bleeding source for this MOI are head and neck injuries.	What are common potential bleeding sources for diving into the shallow end of a swimming pool?
What are common potential bleeding sources for an assault or fight?	A common potential internal bleeding source for this MOI are punching or kicking injury to the chest, the abdomen, or the face.
A common potential internal bleeding source for this MOI are punching or kicking injury to the chest, the abdomen, or the face.	What are common potential bleeding sources for an assault or fight?
What are common potential bleeding sources for a blast or explosive?	A common potential internal bleeding source for this MOI are injury from direct strike with debris, indirect and pressure wave in enclosed space; external injuries are dependent upon the anatomic area of the body injured. Internally, air-containing organs such as the middle of the ears and lungs are the most susceptible to injury.
A common potential internal bleeding source for this MOI are injury from direct strike with debris, indirect and pressure wave in enclosed space; external injuries are dependent upon the anatomic area of the body injured. Internally, air-containing organs such as the middle of the ears and lungs are the most susceptible to injury.	What are common potential bleeding sources for a blast or explosive?
What is a good rule of thumb when entering a scene where you suspect there are multiple patients with bleeding?	In a situation such as this, place several pairs of gloves in your pocket for easy access.
In a situation such as this, place several pairs of gloves in your pocket for easy access.	What is a good rule of thumb when entering a scene where you suspect there are multiple patients with bleeding?
What is hemoptysis?	This is the coughing up of bright red blood.
This is the coughing up of bright red blood.	What is hemoptysis?
What are the later signs of hypoperfusion that suggest internal bleeding?	These signs include: tachycardia; weakness, fainting, or dizziness at rest; thirst; nausea and vomiting; cold, moist skin; shallow, rapid breathing; dull eyes; slightly dilated pupils that are slow to respond to light; capillary refill of more than 2 seconds infants and children; weak, rapid pulse; decreasing blood pressure; altered level of consciousness.
These signs include: tachycardia; weakness, fainting, or dizziness at rest; thirst; nausea and vomiting; cold, moist skin; shallow, rapid breathing; dull eyes; slightly dilated pupils that are slow to respond to light; capillary refill of more than 2 seconds infants and children; weak, rapid pulse; decreasing blood pressure; altered level of consciousness.	What are the later signs of hypoperfusion that suggest internal bleeding?
What is hematemesis?	This is vomited blood.
This is vomited blood.	What is hematemesis?
What is melena?	This is a black, tarry stool that contains digested blood.
This is a black, tarry stool that contains digested blood.	What is melena?
What are some of the common causes of nontraumatic internal bleeding?	These include bleeding ulcers, bleeding from the colon, ruptured ectopic pregnancy, and aneurysms.
These include bleeding ulcers, bleeding from the colon, ruptured ectopic pregnancy, and aneurysms.	What are some of the common causes of nontraumatic internal bleeding?
What are some possible signs of internal bleeding?	These include abdominal tenderness, guarding, rigidity, pain, and distention.
These include abdominal tenderness, guarding, rigidity, pain, and distention.	What are some possible signs of internal bleeding?
What is the second leading cause of trauma death in the United States?	Penetrating trauma is the second leading cause of this in the United States.
Penetrating trauma is the second leading cause of this in the United States.	What is the second leading cause of trauma death in the United States?
What is a proijectile's trajectory?	This is the path the projectile takes, and may be difficult to determine, as medium and high-velocity projectiles may flatten out, tumble, or even ricochet within the body.
This is the path the projectile takes, and may be difficult to determine, as medium and high-velocity projectiles may flatten out, tumble, or even ricochet within the body.	What is a proijectile's trajectory?
What is temporary cavitation?	This is caused by the acceleration of the bullet and causes a streching of the tissues.
This is caused by the acceleration of the bullet and causes a streching of the tissues.	What is temporary cavitation?
What is permanent cavitation?	This is caused by the bullet path and remains once the projectile has passed through the tissue.
This is caused by the bullet path and remains once the projectile has passed through the tissue.	What is permanent cavitation?
What is drag?	This is another term for air resistance, and over distance will slow the projectile, decreasing the depth of penetration and thus reducing damage to the tissues.
This is another term for air resistance, and over distance will slow the projectile, decreasing the depth of penetration and thus reducing damage to the tissues.	What is drag?
What is one reason that exit wounds are often many times larger than entrance wounds?	One reason for this is that, much like a boat moving through water, the bullet disrupts not only the tissues that are directly in its path but also those in the wake.
One reason for this is that, much like a boat moving through water, the bullet disrupts not only the tissues that are directly in its path but also those in the wake.	What is one reason that exit wounds are often many times larger than entrance wounds?
The abdomen contains organs from which systems?	This contains the organs for the digestive, urinary, and genitourinary systems.
This contains the organs for the digestive, urinary, and genitourinary systems.	The abdomen contains organs from which systems?
What percentage of all significant trauma involves the abdomen?	Eight percent of all significant trauma involves this.
Eight percent of all significant trauma involves this.	What percentage of all significant trauma involves the abdomen?
What percentage of all trauma patients have some form of genitourinary tract injury?	10% to 20% of all trauma patients have some form of this.
10% to 20% of all trauma patients have some form of this.	What percentage of all trauma patients have some form of genitourinary tract injury?
What organs are commonly found in the upper right quadrant?	The liver, gallbladder, duodenum, and a small portion of the pancreas are commonly found here.
The liver, gallbladder, duodenum, and a small portion of the pancreas are commonly found here.	What organs are commonly found in the upper right quadrant?
What organs are commonly found in the upper left quadrant of the abdomen?	The stomach and the spleen are commonly found here.
The stomach and the spleen are commonly found here.	What organs are commonly found in the upper left quadrant of the abdomen?
What organs are commonly found in the lower left quadrant?	The descending colon, part of the transverse colon, and parts of the small intestine are commonly found here.
The descending colon, part of the transverse colon, and parts of the small intestine are commonly found here.	What organs are commonly found in the lower left quadrant?
What organs are commonly found in the lower right quadrant?	The distal end of the large intestines (aka the appendix), the ascending large intestines, and part of the small intestines are commonly found here,
The distal end of the large intestines (aka the appendix), the ascending large intestines, and part of the small intestines are commonly found here,	What organs are commonly found in the lower right quadrant?
What is the peritoneal cavity?	This is another name for the abdominal cavity.
This is another name for the abdominal cavity.	What is the peritoneal cavity?
What are the three parts of the large intestines?	The three parts of this are the cecum, the colon, and the rectum.
The three parts of this are the cecum, the colon, and the rectum.	What are the three parts of the large intestines?
What is the intestinal mesentery?	This is a fold of tissue that contains a web of vessels, both arteries and veins, as well as nerves and lymphatic tissues, that connects the small intestines to the posterior of the abdominal wall.
This is a fold of tissue that contains a web of vessels, both arteries and veins, as well as nerves and lymphatic tissues, that connects the small intestines to the posterior of the abdominal wall.	What is the intestinal mesentery?
What is the Cullen sign?	This is periumbilical ecchymosis.
This is periumbilical ecchymosis.	What is the Cullen sign?
What is found in the retroperitoneal region?	The kidneys, bladder, ureters, a majority of the pancreas, the last portion of the colon, as well as the abdominal aorta and the inferior vena cava are found here.
The kidneys, bladder, ureters, a majority of the pancreas, the last portion of the colon, as well as the abdominal aorta and the inferior vena cava are found here.	What is found in the retroperitoneal region?
What are closed abdominal injuries?	These are in juries in which blunt force trauma results in injury to the abdomen without breaking the skin.
These are in juries in which blunt force trauma results in injury to the abdomen without breaking the skin.	What are closed abdominal injuries?
What are some common MOI for closed abdominal injuries?	Common MOI for this include: Motorcycle collisions Falls Blast injuries Pedestrian injuries Compression Deceleration
Common MOI for this include: Motorcycle collisions Falls Blast injuries Pedestrian injuries Compression Deceleration	What are some common MOI for closed abdominal injuries?
What is a clasp-knife injury?	This is a pattern of compression injury that is caused by a poorly placed lap belt.
This is a pattern of compression injury that is caused by a poorly placed lap belt.	What is a clasp-knife injury?
Why can pain in the abdomen frequently be deceiving?	In the abdomen, this can be deceiving because it is often diffuse in nature and may be referred from the site of injury to another location in the body.
In the abdomen, this can be deceiving because it is often diffuse in nature and may be referred from the site of injury to another location in the body.	Why can pain in the abdomen frequently be deceiving?
What is the Kehr sign?	This is often found in patients with liver and spleen injuries, in whom there is bleeding into the peritoneal space; pain is referred to the shoulder.
This is often found in patients with liver and spleen injuries, in whom there is bleeding into the peritoneal space; pain is referred to the shoulder.	What is the Kehr sign?
When a patient reports pain that is tearing and reports it as going from the abdomen posteriorly, what is a frequent cause?	If the patient is reporting this kind of pain, he or she is often describing symptoms of an abdominal aneurysm that is undergoing dissection.
If the patient is reporting this kind of pain, he or she is often describing symptoms of an abdominal aneurysm that is undergoing dissection.	When a patient reports pain that is tearing and reports it as going from the abdomen posteriorly, what is a frequent cause?
What is a possible cause of pain that is following the angle from the lateral hip to the midline of the groin?	This kind of pain may be a result of damage to the kidneys or the ureters.
This kind of pain may be a result of damage to the kidneys or the ureters.	What is a possible cause of pain that is following the angle from the lateral hip to the midline of the groin?
What can pain located in the lower right quadrant indicate?	This kind of pain can indicate an inflamed or ruptured appendix.
This kind of pain can indicate an inflamed or ruptured appendix.	What can pain located in the lower right quadrant indicate?
Where can pain from an injured or inflammed gallbladder be found?	Pain from this can be found just under the margin of the ribs on the right side or between the shoulder blades.
Pain from this can be found just under the margin of the ribs on the right side or between the shoulder blades.	Where can pain from an injured or inflammed gallbladder be found?
What is guarding?	This is intentional or unintentional stiffening of the abdomen muscles, most often the rectus abdominis muscles. This is a natural attempt to splint the area to prevent unnecessary movement.
This is intentional or unintentional stiffening of the abdomen muscles, most often the rectus abdominis muscles. This is a natural attempt to splint the area to prevent unnecessary movement.	What is guarding?
What is often the cause of abdominal distention or swelling between the xiphoid process and the groin?	The cause of this is often free fluid, blood, or organ contents spilling into the peritoneal cavity.
The cause of this is often free fluid, blood, or organ contents spilling into the peritoneal cavity.	What is often the cause of abdominal distention or swelling between the xiphoid process and the groin?
How long might it take for the contusions or hematomas of a closed abdominal injury to become present on the surface?	It might take several minutes to hours after the injury for these to become present on the surface.
It might take several minutes to hours after the injury for these to become present on the surface.	How long might it take for the contusions or hematomas of a closed abdominal injury to become present on the surface?
Where should a seatbelt properly be worn on the body?	This should be worn below the anterior superior iliac spines of the pelvis and against the hip joints.
This should be worn below the anterior superior iliac spines of the pelvis and against the hip joints.	Where should a seatbelt properly be worn on the body?
What is a concern for women in the later stages of pregnancy regarding seatbelts?	For these patients, the gravid uterus has displaced the bladder to the anterior. This anatomic change allows the normally protected bladder to become more susceptible to injuries from impacts and the seatbelt.
For these patients, the gravid uterus has displaced the bladder to the anterior. This anatomic change allows the normally protected bladder to become more susceptible to injuries from impacts and the seatbelt.	What is a concern for women in the later stages of pregnancy regarding seatbelts?
What are open abdominal injuries?	These are injuries in which a foreign object enters the abdomen and opens the peritoneal cavity to the outside; they are also known as penetrating injuries.
These are injuries in which a foreign object enters the abdomen and opens the peritoneal cavity to the outside; they are also known as penetrating injuries.	What are open abdominal injuries?
What are some observations to make for hospital personnel regarding vehicle accidents?	In these situations, be thorough in documenting whether the airbags deployed and the condition of the exterior and steering column.
In these situations, be thorough in documenting whether the airbags deployed and the condition of the exterior and steering column.	What are some observations to make for hospital personnel regarding vehicle accidents?
What are the 3 kinds of open abdominal injuries?	The three kinds of this are: Low-velocity injuries (knives) Medium-velocity injuries (low-caliber handguns and shotguns) High-velocity injuries (high-powered rifles and handguns)
The three kinds of this are: Low-velocity injuries (knives) Medium-velocity injuries (low-caliber handguns and shotguns) High-velocity injuries (high-powered rifles and handguns)	What are the 3 kinds of open abdominal injuries?
What should you assume anytime you have a patient with an injury at or below the xiphoid process?	Anytime you have a patient with this, you should assume that the thoracic and peritoneal cavity have both been violated.
Anytime you have a patient with this, you should assume that the thoracic and peritoneal cavity have both been violated.	What should you assume anytime you have a patient with an injury at or below the xiphoid process?
What is one very common sign of significant abdominal injury?	One very common sign of this is tachycardia, because the heart is increasing its pumping action to compensate for blood loss.
One very common sign of this is tachycardia, because the heart is increasing its pumping action to compensate for blood loss.	What is one very common sign of significant abdominal injury?
What are flanks?	These are the posterior region below the lower margin of the rib cage.
These are the posterior region below the lower margin of the rib cage.	What are flanks?
What is Gary Turner sign, and what may it suggest?	This is bruising in the upper right quadrant, left lower quadrant, or flank, and may suggest injury to the liver, spleen, or kidney, respectively.
This is bruising in the upper right quadrant, left lower quadrant, or flank, and may suggest injury to the liver, spleen, or kidney, respectively.	What is Gary Turner sign, and what may it suggest?
What can air in the peritoneal cavity cause?	This can produce pain, irritate the tissues it contacts and can cause tissue ischemia and infarction.
This can produce pain, irritate the tissues it contacts and can cause tissue ischemia and infarction.	What can air in the peritoneal cavity cause?
What will air in the peritoneal cavity typically do when a patient changes position?	This seeks the most superior space or void, and thus will change position as a patient it re-positioned.
This seeks the most superior space or void, and thus will change position as a patient it re-positioned.	What will air in the peritoneal cavity typically do when a patient changes position?
What is the largest organ in the abdomen?	This is the liver.
This is the liver.	What is the largest organ in the abdomen?
When is the spleen often injured?	This is often injured during motor vehicle collisions (especially in the cases of improperly placed seatbelts or from steering wheels) falls from heights or onto sharp objects, and bicycle and motorcycle accidents where the patient hits the handlebars on impact.
This is often injured during motor vehicle collisions (especially in the cases of improperly placed seatbelts or from steering wheels) falls from heights or onto sharp objects, and bicycle and motorcycle accidents where the patient hits the handlebars on impact.	When is the spleen often injured?
What are dysbarism injuries?	These are the signs and symptoms related to changes in barometric pressure.
These are the signs and symptoms related to changes in barometric pressure.	What are dysbarism injuries?
At what age do infants gain the ability to shiver in order to regulare their temperature at birth?	Infants do no gain this ability until about 12 to 18 months of age.
Infants do no gain this ability until about 12 to 18 months of age.	At what age do infants gain the ability to shiver in order to regulare their temperature at birth?
Why are the elderly frequently cold?	They are frequently in this condition because they have lost subcutaneous tissues, reducing the amount of insulation they have.
They are frequently in this condition because they have lost subcutaneous tissues, reducing the amount of insulation they have.	Why are the elderly frequently cold?
What is an important catalyst for much of our body's metabolism?	Water is an important catalyst for this.
Water is an important catalyst for this.	What is an important catalyst for much of our body's metabolism?
At what temperature do many hypothermia cases occur?	Many of these cases occur at temperatures between 30 and 50 F.
Many of these cases occur at temperatures between 30 and 50 F.	At what temperature do many hypothermia cases occur?
At what temperature do most heat stroke cases occur?	Most of these cases occur when the temperature is 80 F and humidity is 80%.
Most of these cases occur when the temperature is 80 F and humidity is 80%.	At what temperature do most heat stroke cases occur?
What is hypothermia?	This condition is when the entire (core) body temperature falls.
This condition is when the entire (core) body temperature falls.	What is hypothermia?
What are the five ways the body loses heat?	They are: Conduction Convection Evaporation Radiation Respiration
They are: Conduction Convection Evaporation Radiation Respiration	What are the five ways the body loses heat?
What is conduction?	This is the direct transfer of heat from one part of the body to a colder object by direct contact; heat passes directly from the body to the colder object.
This is the direct transfer of heat from one part of the body to a colder object by direct contact; heat passes directly from the body to the colder object.	What is conduction?
What is convection?	This occurs when heat is transferred to ciculating air, such as when cool air moves across the body surface.
This occurs when heat is transferred to ciculating air, such as when cool air moves across the body surface.	What is convection?
What is evaporation?	This is the conversion of any liquid to a gas, a process that requires energy, or heat.
This is the conversion of any liquid to a gas, a process that requires energy, or heat.	What is evaporation?
What is radiation?	This is the transfer of heat by radiant energy, a type of invisible light that transfers heat.
This is the transfer of heat by radiant energy, a type of invisible light that transfers heat.	What is radiation?
What three ways can modify the rate and amount of heat loss or gain by the body?	These three are: Increase or decrease heat production (shivering or movement) Move to an area where heat loss is decreased or increased Wear insulated clothing
These three are: Increase or decrease heat production (shivering or movement) Move to an area where heat loss is decreased or increased Wear insulated clothing	What three ways can modify the rate and amount of heat loss or gain by the body?
What kind of clothes provide good insulation?	Layers of clothes that trap air, as well as wool, down, and synthetic fabrics that have small pockets of trapped air are good for this.
Layers of clothes that trap air, as well as wool, down, and synthetic fabrics that have small pockets of trapped air are good for this.	What kind of clothes provide good insulation?
What is core temperature?	This is the temperature of the heart, lungs, and vital organs.
This is the temperature of the heart, lungs, and vital organs.	What is core temperature?
What does the body normally do to protect itself against heat loss?	The body normally constricts blood vessels in the skin to protect against this, resulting in the appearance of blue lips and/or fingertips.
The body normally constricts blood vessels in the skin to protect against this, resulting in the appearance of blue lips and/or fingertips.	What does the body normally do to protect itself against heat loss?
How should you assess a patient's general temperature?	To do this, pull back on your glove and place the back of your hand on the patient's skin at the abdomen.
To do this, pull back on your glove and place the back of your hand on the patient's skin at the abdomen.	How should you assess a patient's general temperature?
What are the characteristics of mild hypothermia (93 to 95 Fahrenheit / 34 to 35 Celsius)?	At this stage, shivering and foot stamping occurs; vasoconstriction and tachycardia are common responses; and patient appears withdrawn.
At this stage, shivering and foot stamping occurs; vasoconstriction and tachycardia are common responses; and patient appears withdrawn.	What are the characteristics of mild hypothermia (93 to 95 Fahrenheit / 34 to 35 Celsius)?
What are the characteristics of moderate hypothermia (89 to 92F/ 32 to 33C)?	At this stage, loss of coordination and muscle stiffness presents; respiration and pulse slows; and patient appears confused and lethargic.
At this stage, loss of coordination and muscle stiffness presents; respiration and pulse slows; and patient appears confused and lethargic.	What are the characteristics of moderate hypothermia (89 to 92F/ 32 to 33C)?
What are the characteristics of severe hypothermia (80 to 88F/ 27 to 31C)?	Patient is comatose and unresponsive; pulse is weak, respirations are very slow, and arrhythmias are present; cardiac arrest likely.
Patient is comatose and unresponsive; pulse is weak, respirations are very slow, and arrhythmias are present; cardiac arrest likely.	What are the characteristics of severe hypothermia (80 to 88F/ 27 to 31C)?
What is frostnip?	This is when exposed parts of the body become very cold but not frozen.
This is when exposed parts of the body become very cold but not frozen.	What is frostnip?
What are some factors to consider in determing the severity of a local cold injury?	Some underlying factors to consider include: Exposure to wet conditions Inadequate insulation from cold or wind restricted circulation from tight clothing or shoes or ciculatory disease Fatigue Poor nutrition Alcohol or drug abuse Hypothermia Diabetes Cardiovascular disease Older age
Some underlying factors to consider include: Exposure to wet conditions Inadequate insulation from cold or wind restricted circulation from tight clothing or shoes or ciculatory disease Fatigue Poor nutrition Alcohol or drug abuse Hypothermia Diabetes Cardiovascular disease Older age	What are some factors to consider in determing the severity of a local cold injury?
What is immersion foot?	This is also called trench foot, and occurs after prolonged exposure to cold water.
This is also called trench foot, and occurs after prolonged exposure to cold water.	What is immersion foot?
What are some possible mechanisms of damage from frostbite?	Though the exact causes are not known, the presence of ice crystals within the cells may cause physical damage, or the change in the water content may change the concentration of electrolytes.
Though the exact causes are not known, the presence of ice crystals within the cells may cause physical damage, or the change in the water content may change the concentration of electrolytes.	What are some possible mechanisms of damage from frostbite?
What is gangrene?	This is cell death, and may require amputation.
This is cell death, and may require amputation.	What is gangrene?
What are some signs and symptoms of frostbite?	Signs and symptoms of this are: Hard or waxy tissue Red, purple, white, mottled or cyanotic skin
Signs and symptoms of this are: Hard or waxy tissue Red, purple, white, mottled or cyanotic skin	What are some signs and symptoms of frostbite?
What is the difference between superficial and deep frostbite?	In the second, more serious condition, the deeper tissues are frozen as well. Note that you will be unable to tell the difference in the field; even an experienced surgeon in a hospital setting may not be able to tell until several days have gone by.
In the second, more serious condition, the deeper tissues are frozen as well. Note that you will be unable to tell the difference in the field; even an experienced surgeon in a hospital setting may not be able to tell until several days have gone by.	What is the difference between superficial and deep frostbite?
What kind of oxygen (if available) should you use on patients with hypothermia.	If available, use warmed and humidified oxygen in this situation.
If available, use warmed and humidified oxygen in this situation.	What kind of oxygen (if available) should you use on patients with hypothermia.
Why might pulse oximetry often be inaccurate with hypothermic patients?	Pulse oximetry will often be inaccurate in these kinds of patients due to the lack of perfusion in the extremities.
Pulse oximetry will often be inaccurate in these kinds of patients due to the lack of perfusion in the extremities.	Why might pulse oximetry often be inaccurate with hypothermic patients?
What kind of clothing should you never remove from a patient's skin.	Never remove this if it's frozen to their skin.
Never remove this if it's frozen to their skin.	What kind of clothing should you never remove from a patient's skin.
What should you not allow hypothermic patients to do when treating them?	With these patients, you should not allow the patients to eat, use any stimulants, such as coffee, tea, or cola, or to smoke or chew tobacco. Do not message the extremities.
With these patients, you should not allow the patients to eat, use any stimulants, such as coffee, tea, or cola, or to smoke or chew tobacco. Do not message the extremities.	What should you not allow hypothermic patients to do when treating them?
What can you do to patients with mild cases of hypothermia?	In this situation, you can give warm fluids by mouth, assuming that the patient can swallow without a problem.
In this situation, you can give warm fluids by mouth, assuming that the patient can swallow without a problem.	What can you do to patients with mild cases of hypothermia?
What should you never do with patients with moderate or severe hypothermia?	In these cases, you should never try to actively rewarm the patients, as this may cause a fatal cardiac arrhythmia that requires defibrillation. For this reason, passive rewarming is also best delivered at an appropriate facility.
In these cases, you should never try to actively rewarm the patients, as this may cause a fatal cardiac arrhythmia that requires defibrillation. For this reason, passive rewarming is also best delivered at an appropriate facility.	What should you never do with patients with moderate or severe hypothermia?
What should you do if prompt hospital care is not available and medical control instructs you to begin rewarming a hypothermic or frostbitten patient in the field?	In this situation, use a warm-water bath with a temperature of between 100 and 105F (38 and 40.5C).
In this situation, use a warm-water bath with a temperature of between 100 and 105F (38 and 40.5C).	What should you do if prompt hospital care is not available and medical control instructs you to begin rewarming a hypothermic or frostbitten patient in the field?
What is ambient temperature?	This is the temperature of the surrounding environment.
This is the temperature of the surrounding environment.	What is ambient temperature?
What is hyperthermia?	This is a high core body temperature, usually 101F (38.3 C) or higher.
This is a high core body temperature, usually 101F (38.3 C) or higher.	What is hyperthermia?
How much water should a person drink a day when exertion or heat is involved?	In this situation, a person should consume 3 L of water.
In this situation, a person should consume 3 L of water.	How much water should a person drink a day when exertion or heat is involved?
During vigorous exercise, how much sweat can lose an hour?	During this situation, the body can lose more than 1 L sweat
During this situation, the body can lose more than 1 L sweat	During vigorous exercise, how much sweat can lose an hour?
What are the three forms of illness from heat exposure?	The three forms are: Heat cramps Heat exhaustion Heatstroke
The three forms are: Heat cramps Heat exhaustion Heatstroke	What are the three forms of illness from heat exposure?
Who are the persons at greatest risk for heat illnesses?	The people at greatest risk for these are: Geriatric patients, Newborns, Infants, patients with heart disease, C.O.P.D., Diabetes, Dehydration, Obesity, and patients with limited mobility.
The people at greatest risk for these are: Geriatric patients, Newborns, Infants, patients with heart disease, C.O.P.D., Diabetes, Dehydration, Obesity, and patients with limited mobility.	Who are the persons at greatest risk for heat illnesses?
What are heat cramps?	These are painful muscle spasms that occur after vigorous exercise. Their exact cause is not understood, and may be related to a loss of essential electrolytes from the cells.
These are painful muscle spasms that occur after vigorous exercise. Their exact cause is not understood, and may be related to a loss of essential electrolytes from the cells.	What are heat cramps?
What should you suspect with a patient with a sudden onset of abdominal cramps?	In this situation, you should suspect heat cramps.
In this situation, you should suspect heat cramps.	What should you suspect with a patient with a sudden onset of abdominal cramps?
What is heat exhaustion?	This is the most common serious illness caused by heat, and is also called heat prostration; it is caused by hypovolemia as the result of the loss of water and electrolytes from heavy sweating.
This is the most common serious illness caused by heat, and is also called heat prostration; it is caused by hypovolemia as the result of the loss of water and electrolytes from heavy sweating.	What is heat exhaustion?
What are the signs and symptoms of heat exhaustion?	The signs and symptoms of this are: Dizziness Weakness Fainting Muscle cramping Nausea and vomiting Headache Cold, clammy skin with ashen pallor Dry tongue and thirst Rapid and weak pulse Low diastolic blood pressure
The signs and symptoms of this are: Dizziness Weakness Fainting Muscle cramping Nausea and vomiting Headache Cold, clammy skin with ashen pallor Dry tongue and thirst Rapid and weak pulse Low diastolic blood pressure	What are the signs and symptoms of heat exhaustion?
What is heatstroke?	This is the least common but most serious illness caused by heat exposure. It occurs when the body is subjected to more heat than it can handle and normal mechanisms are overwhelmed. Untreated, it always results in death.
This is the least common but most serious illness caused by heat exposure. It occurs when the body is subjected to more heat than it can handle and normal mechanisms are overwhelmed. Untreated, it always results in death.	What is heatstroke?
What are some signs and symptoms of heat stroke?	Some signs and symptoms of this are: A body temperature that may rise to 106F (41C) A patient CAN still be sweating A change in behavior Decreasing consciousness, followed by unconsciousness Increased respiratory rate.
Some signs and symptoms of this are: A body temperature that may rise to 106F (41C) A patient CAN still be sweating A change in behavior Decreasing consciousness, followed by unconsciousness Increased respiratory rate.	What are some signs and symptoms of heat stroke?
Can you treat heat cramps with hydration?	In this situation, you can treat with water or a diluted elctrolyte solution.
In this situation, you can treat with water or a diluted elctrolyte solution.	Can you treat heat cramps with hydration?
What does moist, pale, cool skin indicate?	This indicates excessive fluid and salt loss.
This indicates excessive fluid and salt loss.	What does moist, pale, cool skin indicate?
What does hot, dry or hot, moist skin indicate?	This indicates that the body is unable to regulate core temperature.
This indicates that the body is unable to regulate core temperature.	What does hot, dry or hot, moist skin indicate?
What are some examples of non-ionized radiation?	Some examples of this are cell phones, microwave ovens, and UV sunlight.
Some examples of this are cell phones, microwave ovens, and UV sunlight.	What are some examples of non-ionized radiation?
How long can it take for sunlight to burn unprotected skin?	This can burn in as little as 30 minutes.
This can burn in as little as 30 minutes.	How long can it take for sunlight to burn unprotected skin?
What is drowning?	This is the process of experiencing respiratory impairment from submersion/immersion in liquid.
This is the process of experiencing respiratory impairment from submersion/immersion in liquid.	What is drowning?
According to the CDC, how many unintentional drownings occur a day?	According to the CDC, 10 of these occur per day.
According to the CDC, 10 of these occur per day.	According to the CDC, how many unintentional drownings occur a day?
What percentage of drownings are children younger than 14?	25% of these are younger than 14.
25% of these are younger than 14.	What percentage of drownings are children younger than 14?
What is laryngospasm?	This occurs when very small amounts of either fresh or salt water can severely irritate the larynx.
This occurs when very small amounts of either fresh or salt water can severely irritate the larynx.	What is laryngospasm?
In what percentage of drowning cases is there significant amounts of water in the lungs of the victim?	In these situations, 85% to 90% of cases have these.
In these situations, 85% to 90% of cases have these.	In what percentage of drowning cases is there significant amounts of water in the lungs of the victim?
When should you assume a drowning patient has a spinal injury?	You should assume this when: The submersion has resulted from a diving mishap or long fall. The patient is unconscious, and no information is available to rule out the possibility of a mechanism causing neck injury. The patient is conscious but complains of weakness, paralysis, or numbness in the arms or legs. You suspect the possibility of spinal injury despite what witnesses say.
You should assume this when: The submersion has resulted from a diving mishap or long fall. The patient is unconscious, and no information is available to rule out the possibility of a mechanism causing neck injury. The patient is conscious but complains of weakness, paralysis, or numbness in the arms or legs. You suspect the possibility of spinal injury despite what witnesses say.	When should you assume a drowning patient has a spinal injury?
What does SCUBA stand for?	This stands for Self-contained Underwater Breathing Apparatus.
This stands for Self-contained Underwater Breathing Apparatus.	What does SCUBA stand for?
How do you stabilize a suspected spinal injury in water?	In order to do this: 1. Turn the patient supine (always roate the entire upper half of the body as a single unit) 2. Restore the airway and begin ventilation 3. Float a buoyant back board under the patient as you continue ventilation. 4. Secure the trunk and head to the backboard to eliminate motion of the cervical spine. Do not remove the patient from the water until this is done. 5. Remove the patient from the water on the backboard. 6. Cover the patient with a blanket, give oxygen or initiate CPR depending on pulse and breath.
In order to do this: 1. Turn the patient supine (always roate the entire upper half of the body as a single unit) 2. Restore the airway and begin ventilation 3. Float a buoyant back board under the patient as you continue ventilation. 4. Secure the trunk and head to the backboard to eliminate motion of the cervical spine. Do not remove the patient from the water until this is done. 5. Remove the patient from the water on the backboard. 6. Cover the patient with a blanket, give oxygen or initiate CPR depending on pulse and breath.	How do you stabilize a suspected spinal injury in water?
When should you give up on resuscitating a cold-water victim?	You should never do this. When a person is submerged in water that is colder than body temperature, heat will be conducted from the body to the water. The resulting hypothermia can protect vital organs from the lack of oxygen.
You should never do this. When a person is submerged in water that is colder than body temperature, heat will be conducted from the body to the water. The resulting hypothermia can protect vital organs from the lack of oxygen.	When should you give up on resuscitating a cold-water victim?
What is the diving reflex?	This is a slowing of the heart rate caused by submersion in cold water, and may cause immediate bradycardia. Loss of consciousness and drowning may occur; however, due to the slower metabolic rate, the patient may be able to survive for an extended period of time.
This is a slowing of the heart rate caused by submersion in cold water, and may cause immediate bradycardia. Loss of consciousness and drowning may occur; however, due to the slower metabolic rate, the patient may be able to survive for an extended period of time.	What is the diving reflex?
What are descent emergencies?	These are usually caused by the sudden increase in pressure on the body as the person dives deeper into the water. The usual areas affected are the lungs, the sinus cavities, the middle ear, the teeth, and the area of the face surrounded by the diving mask.
These are usually caused by the sudden increase in pressure on the body as the person dives deeper into the water. The usual areas affected are the lungs, the sinus cavities, the middle ear, the teeth, and the area of the face surrounded by the diving mask.	What are descent emergencies?
What is a special concern for a diver with a perforated tympanic membrane?	If cold water enters the middle ear through this, the diver may lose his or her balance and orientation.
If cold water enters the middle ear through this, the diver may lose his or her balance and orientation.	What is a special concern for a diver with a perforated tympanic membrane?
What are two particularly dangerous medical emergencies that result from ascent emergencies?	"These are air embolisms and decompression sickness (aka ""the bends"")."
"These are air embolisms and decompression sickness (aka ""the bends"")."	What are two particularly dangerous medical emergencies that result from ascent emergencies?
What is an air embolism?	This is a condition involving bubbles of air in the blood vessels. They can occur on a dive as shallow as 6'. The problem starts when the diver holds his or her breath during a rapid ascent. The air pressure in the lungs remains at a high level while the external pressure on the chest decreases. As a result, the air inside the lungs expand rapidly, causing the alveoli in the lungs to rupture.
This is a condition involving bubbles of air in the blood vessels. They can occur on a dive as shallow as 6'. The problem starts when the diver holds his or her breath during a rapid ascent. The air pressure in the lungs remains at a high level while the external pressure on the chest decreases. As a result, the air inside the lungs expand rapidly, causing the alveoli in the lungs to rupture.	What is an air embolism?
What injuries can result from a scuba air embolism?	The following injuries can result from this condition: Air may enter the pleural space and compress the lungs (pneumothorax) Air may enter the mediastinum Air may enter the bloodstream and create bubbles of air in the vessels called air emboli.
The following injuries can result from this condition: Air may enter the pleural space and compress the lungs (pneumothorax) Air may enter the mediastinum Air may enter the bloodstream and create bubbles of air in the vessels called air emboli.	What injuries can result from a scuba air embolism?
What is the mediastinum?	This is the space within the thorax that contains the heart and great vessels.
This is the space within the thorax that contains the heart and great vessels.	What is the mediastinum?
What are the signs and symptoms of an air embolism?	The signs and symptoms of this are: Blotching (mottling of the skin) Froth at the nose and mouth Severe pain in muscles, joints, or abdomen Dyspnea and/or chest pain Dizziness, nausea, and vomiting Dysphasia (difficulty speaking) Cough Cyanosis Difficulty with vision Paralysis and/or coma Irregular pulse and even cardiac arrest
The signs and symptoms of this are: Blotching (mottling of the skin) Froth at the nose and mouth Severe pain in muscles, joints, or abdomen Dyspnea and/or chest pain Dizziness, nausea, and vomiting Dysphasia (difficulty speaking) Cough Cyanosis Difficulty with vision Paralysis and/or coma Irregular pulse and even cardiac arrest	What are the signs and symptoms of an air embolism?
What is decompression sickness (aka the bends)?	This occurs when bubbles of gas, especially nitrogen, obstruct the blood vessels. It results from too rapid an ascent from a dive, too long of a dive at too deep a depth, or repeated dives on the same day without the proper time intervals. During the dive, nitrogen that is being breathed dissolves in the blood and tissues because it is under pressure. When the diver ascends, the external pressure is decreased, and the dissolved nitrogen forms small bubbles within those tissues.
This occurs when bubbles of gas, especially nitrogen, obstruct the blood vessels. It results from too rapid an ascent from a dive, too long of a dive at too deep a depth, or repeated dives on the same day without the proper time intervals. During the dive, nitrogen that is being breathed dissolves in the blood and tissues because it is under pressure. When the diver ascends, the external pressure is decreased, and the dissolved nitrogen forms small bubbles within those tissues.	What is decompression sickness (aka the bends)?
What is the most striking symptom regarding decompression sickness?	"The most striking symptom of this is joint pain so severe that the patient literally doubles up, or ""bends""."
"The most striking symptom of this is joint pain so severe that the patient literally doubles up, or ""bends""."	What is the most striking symptom regarding decompression sickness?
What is a danger to consider regarding decompression sickness?	"In this case, even after a ""safe dive"", this can occur from driving up a mountain or flying in an unpressurized plane. The risk of this diminishes after 24 to 48 hours."
"In this case, even after a ""safe dive"", this can occur from driving up a mountain or flying in an unpressurized plane. The risk of this diminishes after 24 to 48 hours."	What is a danger to consider regarding decompression sickness?
What is the general rule regarding air embolism and decompression sickness?	As a general rule, the first occurs immediately on return to the surface, the second may not occur for several hours. However, the emergency is the same for both: BLS, then recompression in a hyperbaric chamber.
As a general rule, the first occurs immediately on return to the surface, the second may not occur for several hours. However, the emergency is the same for both: BLS, then recompression in a hyperbaric chamber.	What is the general rule regarding air embolism and decompression sickness?
What position should you place a conscious patient you suspect of having an air embolism or decompression sickness?	In this situation, you should place the patient in a left lateral recumbent position with their head down.
In this situation, you should place the patient in a left lateral recumbent position with their head down.	What position should you place a conscious patient you suspect of having an air embolism or decompression sickness?
What is breath-holding syncope?	This is a loss of consciousness caused by a decreased stimulus for breathing. This happens to swimmers who breathe in and out rapidly and deeply before entering the water in an effort to expand their capacity to stay underwater. Whereas this technique increases the swimmer's oxygen level, the hyperventilation involved lowers the carbon dioxide level. Because an elevated level of carbon dioxide in the blood is the strongest stimulus for breathing, the swimmer may not feel the need to breathe even after using up all the oxygen in his or her lungs.
This is a loss of consciousness caused by a decreased stimulus for breathing. This happens to swimmers who breathe in and out rapidly and deeply before entering the water in an effort to expand their capacity to stay underwater. Whereas this technique increases the swimmer's oxygen level, the hyperventilation involved lowers the carbon dioxide level. Because an elevated level of carbon dioxide in the blood is the strongest stimulus for breathing, the swimmer may not feel the need to breathe even after using up all the oxygen in his or her lungs.	What is breath-holding syncope?
What are the 3 kinds of high altitude sickness?	These are: 1) Acute mountain sickness 2) High-Altitude Cerebral Edema (HACE) 3) High-Altitude Pulmonary Edema (HAPE)
These are: 1) Acute mountain sickness 2) High-Altitude Cerebral Edema (HACE) 3) High-Altitude Pulmonary Edema (HAPE)	What are the 3 kinds of high altitude sickness?
What is acute mountain sickness?	This is caused by diminished oxygen pressure in the air at altitudes above 8,000', resulting in hypoxia. It strikes those who ascend too fast and those not acclimated to high altitudes.
This is caused by diminished oxygen pressure in the air at altitudes above 8,000', resulting in hypoxia. It strikes those who ascend too fast and those not acclimated to high altitudes.	What is acute mountain sickness?
What are the signs and symptoms of acute mountain sickness?	The signs and symptoms of this include a headache, lightheadedness, fatigue, loss of appetite, nausea, difficulty sleeping, shortness of breath, and swollen face.
The signs and symptoms of this include a headache, lightheadedness, fatigue, loss of appetite, nausea, difficulty sleeping, shortness of breath, and swollen face.	What are the signs and symptoms of acute mountain sickness?
What is HAPE (high-altitude pulmonary edema)?	With this, fluid collects in the lungs, hindering the passage of oxygen in the bloodstream. It can occur at altitudes of 10,000'.
With this, fluid collects in the lungs, hindering the passage of oxygen in the bloodstream. It can occur at altitudes of 10,000'.	What is HAPE (high-altitude pulmonary edema)?
What are the signs and symptoms of HAPE?	The signs and symptoms of this include: Shortness of breath Cough with pink sputum Cyanosis and a rapid pulse
The signs and symptoms of this include: Shortness of breath Cough with pink sputum Cyanosis and a rapid pulse	What are the signs and symptoms of HAPE?
What is HACE (high-altitude cerebral edema)?	This occurs in climbers who climb above 12,000'. It may accompany HAPE and can quickly become life threatening.
This occurs in climbers who climb above 12,000'. It may accompany HAPE and can quickly become life threatening.	What is HACE (high-altitude cerebral edema)?
What are the signs and symptoms of HACE?	Signs and symptoms of this include: Severe, constantly throbbing headache Ataxia (lack of muscle coordination) Extreme fatigue Vomiting Loss of consciousness
Signs and symptoms of this include: Severe, constantly throbbing headache Ataxia (lack of muscle coordination) Extreme fatigue Vomiting Loss of consciousness	What are the signs and symptoms of HACE?
How should you treat high altitude sickness?	Treatment for this consists of providing oxygen, descending from height, and transport.
Treatment for this consists of providing oxygen, descending from height, and transport.	How should you treat high altitude sickness?
According to the National Weather Service, how many cloud-to-ground lightning flashes are there in the US each year?	There are 25 million of these each year according to the National Weather Service.
There are 25 million of these each year according to the National Weather Service.	According to the National Weather Service, how many cloud-to-ground lightning flashes are there in the US each year?
How many documented deaths from lightning strikes are there annually in the US?	This causes 60-70 documented deaths in the United States annually.
This causes 60-70 documented deaths in the United States annually.	How many documented deaths from lightning strikes are there annually in the US?
How many documented injuries from lightning are reported in the US every year?	There are about 300 of these reported each year in the US.
There are about 300 of these reported each year in the US.	How many documented injuries from lightning are reported in the US every year?
What is the 3rd most common cause of death from isolated environmental phenomena?	This is lightning.
This is lightning.	What is the 3rd most common cause of death from isolated environmental phenomena?
What degree of energy is typically found in lightning?	This has a direct current of up to 200,000 volts and a potential of 100 million volts or more. Temperatures generated vary between 20,000 and 60,000 F.
This has a direct current of up to 200,000 volts and a potential of 100 million volts or more. Temperatures generated vary between 20,000 and 60,000 F.	What degree of energy is typically found in lightning?
What are the three catagories of lightning injuries?	The three catagories are: 1) Mild (loss of consciousness, amnesia, confusion, tingling, superficial burns) 2) Moderate (seizures, respiratory arrest, cardiac asystole that spontaneously resolves, superficial burns 3) Severe (cardiopulmonary arrest; survival rare)
The three catagories are: 1) Mild (loss of consciousness, amnesia, confusion, tingling, superficial burns) 2) Moderate (seizures, respiratory arrest, cardiac asystole that spontaneously resolves, superficial burns 3) Severe (cardiopulmonary arrest; survival rare)	What are the three catagories of lightning injuries?
What is a sure sign of an immenent lightning strike, and what should you do to prevent being hit?	If you suddenly feel a tingling sensation or your hair standing on end, make yourself as small as possible by squatting down into a ball, close to but not touching the ground.
If you suddenly feel a tingling sensation or your hair standing on end, make yourself as small as possible by squatting down into a ball, close to but not touching the ground.	What is a sure sign of an immenent lightning strike, and what should you do to prevent being hit?
What is reverse triage?	This process differs from conventional triage, which emphasizes treating patients not in cardiac arrest. Here, you should focus your efforts on those who are in respiratory or cardiac arrest.
This process differs from conventional triage, which emphasizes treating patients not in cardiac arrest. Here, you should focus your efforts on those who are in respiratory or cardiac arrest.	What is reverse triage?
What may occur following a massive direct current shock?	This can cause tetany (massive muscle spasms) that can result in fractures of long bones and spinal vertebrae. Therefore, always use the jaw-thrust maneuver.
This can cause tetany (massive muscle spasms) that can result in fractures of long bones and spinal vertebrae. Therefore, always use the jaw-thrust maneuver.	What may occur following a massive direct current shock?
What is the black widow spider?	"This spider's latin name is Latrodectus hesperus/mactans/variolus (depending on region), and the female measures approx. 2"" long. It is usually black and has a distinctive, bright red-orange marking in the shape of an hourglass on its abdomen. The female is larger and more toxic than the male. They are found in every state except Alaska."
"This spider's latin name is Latrodectus hesperus/mactans/variolus (depending on region), and the female measures approx. 2"" long. It is usually black and has a distinctive, bright red-orange marking in the shape of an hourglass on its abdomen. The female is larger and more toxic than the male. They are found in every state except Alaska."	What is the black widow spider?
What are the effects of a black widow spider bite?	Most of these bites cause localized pain and symptoms, including agonizing muscle spasms. In some cases, a bite on the abdomen cause muscle spasms so severe that the patient may be thought to have an acute abdominal condition, possibly peritonitis. The venom is a neurotoxic (damages to nerve tissues). Other symptoms include dizziness, sweating, nausea, vomiting, and rashes. These signs and symptoms generally subside over 48 hours.
Most of these bites cause localized pain and symptoms, including agonizing muscle spasms. In some cases, a bite on the abdomen cause muscle spasms so severe that the patient may be thought to have an acute abdominal condition, possibly peritonitis. The venom is a neurotoxic (damages to nerve tissues). Other symptoms include dizziness, sweating, nausea, vomiting, and rashes. These signs and symptoms generally subside over 48 hours.	What are the effects of a black widow spider bite?
What is an antivenim?	This is a serum containing antibodies that counteract the venom.
This is a serum containing antibodies that counteract the venom.	What is an antivenim?
How are black widow spider bites usually treated?	For very severe bites, the aged or feeble, or children younger than five, the antivenim is used. Severe muscle spasms are usually treated with IV benzodiazepines. In field and if time permits, apply an ice pack to the bite area and clean the wound with soap and water.
For very severe bites, the aged or feeble, or children younger than five, the antivenim is used. Severe muscle spasms are usually treated with IV benzodiazepines. In field and if time permits, apply an ice pack to the bite area and clean the wound with soap and water.	How are black widow spider bites usually treated?
What is the brown recluse spider?	"This spider's Latin name is loxosceles reclusa. It is dull brown and 1"" in diamter. It has a violin-shaped mark on its back. They can be found throughout the US. Its venom is cytotoxic, which means it causes local tissue damage. Bites become swollen and painful within hours."
"This spider's Latin name is loxosceles reclusa. It is dull brown and 1"" in diamter. It has a violin-shaped mark on its back. They can be found throughout the US. Its venom is cytotoxic, which means it causes local tissue damage. Bites become swollen and painful within hours."	What is the brown recluse spider?
What are hymentoptera?	This term refers to bees, wasps, ants, and yellow jackets.
This term refers to bees, wasps, ants, and yellow jackets.	What are hymentoptera?
How many spider bites occur each year around the world?	There are 300,000 of these in the world annually.
There are 300,000 of these in the world annually.	How many spider bites occur each year around the world?
How many deaths are caused by spider bites in the world annually?	There are over 30 to 40,000 deaths annually attributed to this throughout the world.
There are over 30 to 40,000 deaths annually attributed to this throughout the world.	How many deaths are caused by spider bites in the world annually?
How many snakebite fatalities are reported in Southeast Asia and India each year?	There are 25,000 to 30,000 of these reported each year in SE Asia and India.
There are 25,000 to 30,000 of these reported each year in SE Asia and India.	How many snakebite fatalities are reported in Southeast Asia and India each year?
How many snakebite fatalities are reported in South America each year?	There are 3 to 4,000 of these reported each year in South America.
There are 3 to 4,000 of these reported each year in South America.	How many snakebite fatalities are reported in South America each year?
How many snakebites are reported annually in the States?	There are 40 to 50,000 reported each year in the States.
There are 40 to 50,000 reported each year in the States.	How many snakebites are reported annually in the States?
How many snakebite fatalities are reported in the US each year?	There are 15 of these reported in the US every year.
There are 15 of these reported in the US every year.	How many snakebite fatalities are reported in the US each year?
How many snake species are in the US, and how many are poisonous?	There are 115 of these, though only 19 are poisonous.
There are 115 of these, though only 19 are poisonous.	How many snake species are in the US, and how many are poisonous?
What is the science name for rattlesnakes?	This is Crotalus.
This is Crotalus.	What is the science name for rattlesnakes?
What is the latin name for copperheads?	This is Agkistrodon contortrix.
This is Agkistrodon contortrix.	What is the latin name for copperheads?
What is a latin name for water moccasins?	This is Agkistrodon piscivorus.
This is Agkistrodon piscivorus.	What is a latin name for water moccasins?
What states have major concentrations of snake bites?	These states are Louisiana, Georgia, Oklahoma, North Carolina, Arkansas, West Virginia, and Mississippi.
These states are Louisiana, Georgia, Oklahoma, North Carolina, Arkansas, West Virginia, and Mississippi.	What states have major concentrations of snake bites?
Why do only a third of snake bites result in significant local or systemic injuries?	This is because envenomation does not always occur, as the snake has only a finite supply of venom.
This is because envenomation does not always occur, as the snake has only a finite supply of venom.	Why do only a third of snake bites result in significant local or systemic injuries?
What are pit vipers?	These are venomous snakes, including rattlesnakes, copperheads, and cottonmouths, that take their name from the small heat-sensing pits located just behind each nostril and in front of each eye.
These are venomous snakes, including rattlesnakes, copperheads, and cottonmouths, that take their name from the small heat-sensing pits located just behind each nostril and in front of each eye.	What are pit vipers?
What are the physical features of rattlesnakes?	These have colored diamond patterns, and can grow to 6' or more.
These have colored diamond patterns, and can grow to 6' or more.	What are the physical features of rattlesnakes?
What are the physical features of copperheads?	These are smaller than rattlesnakes, 2' to 3' long, typically reddish coppery brown with brown or red bands. Their venom is rarely fatal; it is, however, capable of destroying extremities.
These are smaller than rattlesnakes, 2' to 3' long, typically reddish coppery brown with brown or red bands. Their venom is rarely fatal; it is, however, capable of destroying extremities.	What are the physical features of copperheads?
What are the physical features of cottonmouths?	These grow to about 4' in length, olive or brown with black cross-bands. Fatalities are rare, but tissue destruction may be severe.
These grow to about 4' in length, olive or brown with black cross-bands. Fatalities are rare, but tissue destruction may be severe.	What are the physical features of cottonmouths?
What are the signs of envenomation?	The signs of this are: Severe burning pain at the site Ecchymosis Signs are evident 5 to 10 minutes after the unjury and spread over the next 36 hours Distal bleeding (venom interferes with clotting mechanisms) Weakness Vomiting and Nausea Seizures Fainting Shock
The signs of this are: Severe burning pain at the site Ecchymosis Signs are evident 5 to 10 minutes after the unjury and spread over the next 36 hours Distal bleeding (venom interferes with clotting mechanisms) Weakness Vomiting and Nausea Seizures Fainting Shock	What are the signs of envenomation?
How should you treat a pit viper bite?	"To treat this type of injury: 1) Calm the patient (remind them that snake bites are rarely fatal) and place them in a supine position 2) Locate the bite area and clean with a mild antiseptic (no ice); Place a constricting band 4"" to 6"" above the wound if the patient is hypotensive. 3) Place the extremity below the level of the heart"
"To treat this type of injury: 1) Calm the patient (remind them that snake bites are rarely fatal) and place them in a supine position 2) Locate the bite area and clean with a mild antiseptic (no ice); Place a constricting band 4"" to 6"" above the wound if the patient is hypotensive. 3) Place the extremity below the level of the heart"	How should you treat a pit viper bite?
What are coral snakes?	These are small reptiles with red, yellow, and black bands. Their venom is highly toxic that causes paralysis of the nervous system.
These are small reptiles with red, yellow, and black bands. Their venom is highly toxic that causes paralysis of the nervous system.	What are coral snakes?
Which species of scorpion in the US is dangerous to humans?	This is the Centruroides sculpturatus, A.K.A., the Arizona bark scorpion. It is the most venomous scorpion in North America, and its venom can cause severe pain, typically lasting 24 to 72 hours. Symptoms in extreme reactions include numbness, frothing at the mouth, paralysis, and what may be confused as a seizure that makes breathing difficult. Fatalities are generally limited to children, the elderly, immuno-surpressed patients, and pets.
This is the Centruroides sculpturatus, A.K.A., the Arizona bark scorpion. It is the most venomous scorpion in North America, and its venom can cause severe pain, typically lasting 24 to 72 hours. Symptoms in extreme reactions include numbness, frothing at the mouth, paralysis, and what may be confused as a seizure that makes breathing difficult. Fatalities are generally limited to children, the elderly, immuno-surpressed patients, and pets.	Which species of scorpion in the US is dangerous to humans?
What are the symptoms of a Centruroides sculpturatus sting?	The symptoms for this are: circulatory collapse, severe muscle contractions, excessive salivation, hypertension, convulsions, and cardiac failure.
The symptoms for this are: circulatory collapse, severe muscle contractions, excessive salivation, hypertension, convulsions, and cardiac failure.	What are the symptoms of a Centruroides sculpturatus sting?
What are the symptoms of Rocky Mountain spotted fever?	Symptoms of this include nausea, vomiting, headache, weakness, paralysis, and possible cardiorespiratory failure.
Symptoms of this include nausea, vomiting, headache, weakness, paralysis, and possible cardiorespiratory failure.	What are the symptoms of Rocky Mountain spotted fever?
How long does it take for transmission of an infection from a tick to the host?	This transmission takes 12 hours.
This transmission takes 12 hours.	How long does it take for transmission of an infection from a tick to the host?
What are coelenterates?	These invertebrate animals include fire coral, Protuguese man-of-war, sea wasp, sea nettles, true jellyfish, sea anemones, true coral, and soft coral. They are responsible for more envenomations than any other marine animals. Their stinging cells are called nemocysts.
These invertebrate animals include fire coral, Protuguese man-of-war, sea wasp, sea nettles, true jellyfish, sea anemones, true coral, and soft coral. They are responsible for more envenomations than any other marine animals. Their stinging cells are called nemocysts.	What are coelenterates?
What are common symptoms of nemocystic envenomation?	Symptoms of this include: headache dizziness muscle cramps fainting
Symptoms of this include: headache dizziness muscle cramps fainting	What are common symptoms of nemocystic envenomation?
How should you treat coelenterate envenomation?	To treat this: 1) Keep the patient calm and reduce movement 2) Inactive the nemocysts with vinegar for at least 30 seconds, or isopropyl alcohol if vinegar is not available 3) Remove any remaining tentacles by scraping them off with the edge of a credit card or similar item. 4) Transport
To treat this: 1) Keep the patient calm and reduce movement 2) Inactive the nemocysts with vinegar for at least 30 seconds, or isopropyl alcohol if vinegar is not available 3) Remove any remaining tentacles by scraping them off with the edge of a credit card or similar item. 4) Transport	How should you treat coelenterate envenomation?
What is normal human body temperature?	This is 98.6 F (37 C).
This is 98.6 F (37 C).	What is normal human body temperature?
What can happen if the diaphragm is penetrated or ruptured?	If this happens, loops of bowel are likely to invade the thoracic cavity and can cause bowel sounds to be present during auscultation of the lungs. Patients will exhibit dyspnea.
If this happens, loops of bowel are likely to invade the thoracic cavity and can cause bowel sounds to be present during auscultation of the lungs. Patients will exhibit dyspnea.	What can happen if the diaphragm is penetrated or ruptured?
What is hematuria, and what might it indicate?	This is blood in the urine, and may indicate the kidneys are injured.
This is blood in the urine, and may indicate the kidneys are injured.	What is hematuria, and what might it indicate?
What does blood on the urinary meatus indicate?	This indicates significant trauma to the genitourinary system.
This indicates significant trauma to the genitourinary system.	What does blood on the urinary meatus indicate?
What is the urinary meatus?	This is the opening in the urethra, situated on the glans penis in males and in the vulva in females.
This is the opening in the urethra, situated on the glans penis in males and in the vulva in females.	What is the urinary meatus?
What is something to remember in pediatric patients regarding abdominal injury?	In this situation, remember that the rib cage is so flexible that the chest can be flattened alsmot to the spine before rib fractures occur; the ribs then recoil to their normal position, and the patient is left with very few outward signs that an injury has occurred.
In this situation, remember that the rib cage is so flexible that the chest can be flattened alsmot to the spine before rib fractures occur; the ribs then recoil to their normal position, and the patient is left with very few outward signs that an injury has occurred.	What is something to remember in pediatric patients regarding abdominal injury?
What can you do with patients with abdominal pain without suspected spinal injury to help alleviate pain?	With these patients, you can allow the patient to stay in a position of comfort - with legs pulled up toward the abdomen.
With these patients, you can allow the patient to stay in a position of comfort - with legs pulled up toward the abdomen.	What can you do with patients with abdominal pain without suspected spinal injury to help alleviate pain?
What should you do for patients with abdominal pain who you suspect of spinal injury to alleviate pain?	With these patients, place padding such as blankets or pillows under the patient's knees to help alleviate tension on the abdominal wall.
With these patients, place padding such as blankets or pillows under the patient's knees to help alleviate tension on the abdominal wall.	What should you do for patients with abdominal pain who you suspect of spinal injury to alleviate pain?
What are axillae?	These are armpits.
These are armpits.	What are axillae?
What should you report if you can't hear bowel sounds?	"You should report that they are ""hypoactive""."
"You should report that they are ""hypoactive""."	What should you report if you can't hear bowel sounds?
When you begin palpating the abdominal region, what should you remember to do?	When you start this, remember to start palpating the quadrant farthest away from the quadrant that is exhibiting pain.
When you start this, remember to start palpating the quadrant farthest away from the quadrant that is exhibiting pain.	When you begin palpating the abdominal region, what should you remember to do?
Where are the kidneys located?	These are located in the flank region of the back.
These are located in the flank region of the back.	Where are the kidneys located?
What may a patient who has a ruptured diaphragm have?	A patient with this may have an abdomen with a sunken anterior wall (scaphoid abdomen) and difficulty breathing because of bowel contents in the chest cavity. These patients should receive positive-pressure ventilation with a bag-mask device.
A patient with this may have an abdomen with a sunken anterior wall (scaphoid abdomen) and difficulty breathing because of bowel contents in the chest cavity. These patients should receive positive-pressure ventilation with a bag-mask device.	What may a patient who has a ruptured diaphragm have?
What is the biggest concern in patients with closed abdominal injuries?	The biggest concern with these patients is the fact that you do not know the true extent of the injury. Therefore, expedient transport is essential.
The biggest concern with these patients is the fact that you do not know the true extent of the injury. Therefore, expedient transport is essential.	What is the biggest concern in patients with closed abdominal injuries?
A patient with a blunt abdominal injury may have one or more of which injuries?	A patient with this injury may have one or more of the following injuries: Severe bruising of the abdominal wall; Laceration of the liver and spleen; Rupture of the intestine; Tears in the mesentery; Rupture of the kidneys or avulsion of the kidneys from their arteries and veins; Rupture of the bladder; Severe intra-abdominal hemorrhage; Peritoneal irritation and inflammation in response to the rupture of hollow organs.
A patient with this injury may have one or more of the following injuries: Severe bruising of the abdominal wall; Laceration of the liver and spleen; Rupture of the intestine; Tears in the mesentery; Rupture of the kidneys or avulsion of the kidneys from their arteries and veins; Rupture of the bladder; Severe intra-abdominal hemorrhage; Peritoneal irritation and inflammation in response to the rupture of hollow organs.	A patient with a blunt abdominal injury may have one or more of which injuries?
What position should you place a patient who has sustained a blunt abdominal injury?	You should log roll this kind of patient to a supine position on a backboard.
You should log roll this kind of patient to a supine position on a backboard.	What position should you place a patient who has sustained a blunt abdominal injury?
What should you do with abdominal evisceration?	With these injuries, never try to replace an organ that is protruding from an abdominal laceration; cover it with sterile gauze compresses moistened with sterile saline solution and secure with a sterile dressing; do NOT use any material that is adherent or loses its substance when wet, such as toilet paper, facial tissue, paper towels, or absorbent cotton.
With these injuries, never try to replace an organ that is protruding from an abdominal laceration; cover it with sterile gauze compresses moistened with sterile saline solution and secure with a sterile dressing; do NOT use any material that is adherent or loses its substance when wet, such as toilet paper, facial tissue, paper towels, or absorbent cotton.	What should you do with abdominal evisceration?
What are PASG (Pneumatic AntiShock Garment)?	These were originally developed by the military for fighter pilots who wore them as g-suits. The military needed to increase the pilot's systolic blood pressure to keep the pilot from losing consciousness at high altitudes or while performing certain maneuvers; many studies have now shown that while the g-suit works very efficiently on healthy fighter pilots, it does not resolve shock in the typical trauma patient.
These were originally developed by the military for fighter pilots who wore them as g-suits. The military needed to increase the pilot's systolic blood pressure to keep the pilot from losing consciousness at high altitudes or while performing certain maneuvers; many studies have now shown that while the g-suit works very efficiently on healthy fighter pilots, it does not resolve shock in the typical trauma patient.	What are PASG (Pneumatic AntiShock Garment)?
What does the urinary system do?	This system controls the discharge of certain waste materials filtered from the blood by the kidneys.
This system controls the discharge of certain waste materials filtered from the blood by the kidneys.	What does the urinary system do?
Where does the genital system lie in the male and female?	The male genitalia, except for the prostate gland and the seminal vesicles, lie outside the pelvic cavity. The female genitalia, except for the vulva, clitoris, and labia, are contained entirely within the pelvis.
The male genitalia, except for the prostate gland and the seminal vesicles, lie outside the pelvic cavity. The female genitalia, except for the vulva, clitoris, and labia, are contained entirely within the pelvis.	Where does the genital system lie in the male and female?
What is something to remember regarding penetrating and blunt kidney injuries?	With these injuries, it almost always involve other organs.
With these injuries, it almost always involve other organs.	What is something to remember regarding penetrating and blunt kidney injuries?
When should you suspect kidney damage?	You should suspect this kind of damage if the patient has a history or physical evidence of any of the following: An abrasion, laceration, or contusion in the flank. A penetrating wound in the region of the lower rib cage (flank) or the upper abdomen. Fractures on either side of the lower rib cage, the lower thoracic, or upper lumbar vertebrae, And, A hematoma in the flank region
You should suspect this kind of damage if the patient has a history or physical evidence of any of the following: An abrasion, laceration, or contusion in the flank. A penetrating wound in the region of the lower rib cage (flank) or the upper abdomen. Fractures on either side of the lower rib cage, the lower thoracic, or upper lumbar vertebrae, And, A hematoma in the flank region	When should you suspect kidney damage?
What can sudden deceleration in a crash cause in a male patient?	This event can literally shear the bladder from the urethra.
This event can literally shear the bladder from the urethra.	What can sudden deceleration in a crash cause in a male patient?
What should you remember regarding injuries of the external male genitalia?	With these injuries, it is important to remember that although these injuries are uniformly painful and generally a source of great concern to the patient, they are rarely considered life threatening and should not be given priority over other, more severe wounds.
With these injuries, it is important to remember that although these injuries are uniformly painful and generally a source of great concern to the patient, they are rarely considered life threatening and should not be given priority over other, more severe wounds.	What should you remember regarding injuries of the external male genitalia?
Why are injuries to the uterus particularly severe?	These injuries are particularly severe because the uterus has a rich blood supply during pregnancy.
These injuries are particularly severe because the uterus has a rich blood supply during pregnancy.	Why are injuries to the uterus particularly severe?
What is something important to cosider regarding the blood pressure of a patient in the last trimester of her pregnancy?	With these patients, remember that that uterus may obstruct the vena cava, decreasing the amount of blood returning to the heart if the patient is placed in a supine position (supine hypotensive syndrome). The patient should instead be placed on her left side so that the uterus will not lie on the vena cava.
With these patients, remember that that uterus may obstruct the vena cava, decreasing the amount of blood returning to the heart if the patient is placed in a supine position (supine hypotensive syndrome). The patient should instead be placed on her left side so that the uterus will not lie on the vena cava.	What is something important to cosider regarding the blood pressure of a patient in the last trimester of her pregnancy?
What should you not do regarding vaginal bleed?	In this situation, do not insert instruments, gloved fingers, or a tampon in the vagina as this can cause further damage.
In this situation, do not insert instruments, gloved fingers, or a tampon in the vagina as this can cause further damage.	What should you not do regarding vaginal bleed?
What are some common complaints associated with genitourinary injuries?	These include nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, blood in the urine (hematuria), vomiting blood (hematemesis), or abnormal bowel and bladder habits such as an increase in frequency or the absence of the need to void.
These include nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, blood in the urine (hematuria), vomiting blood (hematemesis), or abnormal bowel and bladder habits such as an increase in frequency or the absence of the need to void.	What are some common complaints associated with genitourinary injuries?
What can cause lacerations of the urethra?	These injuries can result from straddle injuries, pelvic fractures, or penetrating wounds of the perineum.
These injuries can result from straddle injuries, pelvic fractures, or penetrating wounds of the perineum.	What can cause lacerations of the urethra?
What can direct blows to the scrotum result in?	These can result in significant accumulation of blood around the testes; you should apply an ice pack to the scrotal area while transporting the patient.
These can result in significant accumulation of blood around the testes; you should apply an ice pack to the scrotal area while transporting the patient.	What can direct blows to the scrotum result in?
What are some causes of rectal bleeding?	This can be caused by sexual assault, hemorrhoids, colitis, or ulcer of the digestive track.
This can be caused by sexual assault, hemorrhoids, colitis, or ulcer of the digestive track.	What are some causes of rectal bleeding?
What are some general steps to follow regarding sexual assault cases?	In these situations, remember to: Take care to shield the patient from curious onlookers. Because you may have to appear in court as much as 2 or 3 years later, you must document the patient's history, assessment, treatment, and response to treatment in detail. Advise the patient not to wash, douche, urinate, or defecate until after a physician has examined him or her. If the patient will tolerate being wrapped in a sterile burn sheet, this may help investigators to find any hair, fluid, or fiber from the alleged offender. Place all articles or evidence in a paper bag, NOT plastic.
In these situations, remember to: Take care to shield the patient from curious onlookers. Because you may have to appear in court as much as 2 or 3 years later, you must document the patient's history, assessment, treatment, and response to treatment in detail. Advise the patient not to wash, douche, urinate, or defecate until after a physician has examined him or her. If the patient will tolerate being wrapped in a sterile burn sheet, this may help investigators to find any hair, fluid, or fiber from the alleged offender. Place all articles or evidence in a paper bag, NOT plastic.	What are some general steps to follow regarding sexual assault cases?
How many visits to physicians occur annually as a result of complaints related to the musculoskeletal system?	There are almost 60 million of these every year.
There are almost 60 million of these every year.	How many visits to physicians occur annually as a result of complaints related to the musculoskeletal system?
What percentage of Americans experience some type of musculoskeletal impairment, costing hundreds of billions of dollars a year?	Approximately one in seven Americans will experience this in their lives.
Approximately one in seven Americans will experience this in their lives.	What percentage of Americans experience some type of musculoskeletal impairment, costing hundreds of billions of dollars a year?
What percentage of all patients with multiple system trauma have one or more musculoskeletal injuries?	An estimated 70% to 80% all patients with this trauma have this kind of injury.
An estimated 70% to 80% all patients with this trauma have this kind of injury.	What percentage of all patients with multiple system trauma have one or more musculoskeletal injuries?
What are the three types of muscles?	These are: skeletal smooth cardiac
These are: skeletal smooth cardiac	What are the three types of muscles?
What are skeletal muscles (aka striated muscle)?	These muscles attach to the bones and usually cross at least one joint, forming the muscle mass of the body. This type of muscle is also called voluntary muscle, because it is under direct control of the brain.
These muscles attach to the bones and usually cross at least one joint, forming the muscle mass of the body. This type of muscle is also called voluntary muscle, because it is under direct control of the brain.	What are skeletal muscles (aka striated muscle)?
What attaches skeletal muscle to the bone?	This is attached to bone by tough, ropelike fibrous structures known as tendons, which are extensions of fascia that covers all skeletal muscle.
This is attached to bone by tough, ropelike fibrous structures known as tendons, which are extensions of fascia that covers all skeletal muscle.	What attaches skeletal muscle to the bone?
What is smooth muscle?	This is also called involuntary muscle, because it is not under voluntary control of the brain. This type of muscle is found in the walls of most tubular structures of the body, such as the gastrointestinal tract and the blood vessels.
This is also called involuntary muscle, because it is not under voluntary control of the brain. This type of muscle is found in the walls of most tubular structures of the body, such as the gastrointestinal tract and the blood vessels.	What is smooth muscle?
How many bones are in the human skeleton?	There are 206 bones.
There are 206 bones.	How many bones are in the human skeleton?
What are the functions of bones?	These protect our vital organs, allow us to move, produce blood cells in the marrow, and serve as a reservoir for minerals and electrolytes.
These protect our vital organs, allow us to move, produce blood cells in the marrow, and serve as a reservoir for minerals and electrolytes.	What are the functions of bones?
What protects the heart, lungs, and great vessels?	These are protected by the thoracic cage.
These are protected by the thoracic cage.	What protects the heart, lungs, and great vessels?
What protects the liver and spleen?	These are protected by the lower ribs.
These are protected by the lower ribs.	What protects the liver and spleen?
What protects the spinal cord?	The spinal canal protects this.
The spinal canal protects this.	What protects the spinal cord?
What is the pectoral girdle?	This consists of two scapulae and two clavicles.
This consists of two scapulae and two clavicles.	What is the pectoral girdle?
What is the scapula?	This is a flat triangular bone held to the ribcage by powerful muscles that buffer it against injury. It is also called a shoulder blade.
This is a flat triangular bone held to the ribcage by powerful muscles that buffer it against injury. It is also called a shoulder blade.	What is the scapula?
What is the clavicle?	This is a slender, S-shaped bone attached by ligaments to the sternum on one end and to the acromion process on the other. It acts as a strut to keep the shoulder propped up; however, because it is slender and very exposed, this bone is vulnerable to injury. It is also called the collarbone.
This is a slender, S-shaped bone attached by ligaments to the sternum on one end and to the acromion process on the other. It acts as a strut to keep the shoulder propped up; however, because it is slender and very exposed, this bone is vulnerable to injury. It is also called the collarbone.	What is the clavicle?
What is the upper extremity?	This extends form the shoulder to the fingertips and is composed of the arm (humerus), elbow, forearm (radius and ulna), wrist, hand, and fingers. It joins the shoulder girdle at the glenohumeral joint.
This extends form the shoulder to the fingertips and is composed of the arm (humerus), elbow, forearm (radius and ulna), wrist, hand, and fingers. It joins the shoulder girdle at the glenohumeral joint.	What is the upper extremity?
What bones make up the forearm?	This is made up of the radius and ulna.
This is made up of the radius and ulna.	What bones make up the forearm?
What are the three set of hand bones?	These sets of bones are the carpals, the metacarpals, and phalanges.
These sets of bones are the carpals, the metacarpals, and phalanges.	What are the three set of hand bones?
When are carpals vulnerable to fracture?	These bones are vulnerable to fracture when a person falls on an outstreched hand.
These bones are vulnerable to fracture when a person falls on an outstreched hand.	When are carpals vulnerable to fracture?
When are phalanges vulnerable to injury?	These bones are vulnerable to crushing injury.
These bones are vulnerable to crushing injury.	When are phalanges vulnerable to injury?
What is the pelvis?	This supports the body weight and protects the structures within the pelvis - the bladder, rectum, and female reproductive organs.
This supports the body weight and protects the structures within the pelvis - the bladder, rectum, and female reproductive organs.	What is the pelvis?
What are the three bones in the pelvic girdle?	The three separate bones are: the ischium ilium and pubis These together make up the innominate bone.
The three separate bones are: the ischium ilium and pubis These together make up the innominate bone.	What are the three bones in the pelvic girdle?
What connects the two pubic bones anteriorly?	These are joined by ligaments to each other at the pubic symphasis.
These are joined by ligaments to each other at the pubic symphasis.	What connects the two pubic bones anteriorly?
What do the iliac bones connect to posteriorly?	These are joined by ligaments to the sacrum at the sacroliac joint.
These are joined by ligaments to the sacrum at the sacroliac joint.	What do the iliac bones connect to posteriorly?
What is the femur?	This is a long, powerful bone that connects in the ball-and-socket joint of the pelvis and in the hinge joint of the knee.
This is a long, powerful bone that connects in the ball-and-socket joint of the pelvis and in the hinge joint of the knee.	What is the femur?
What is the head of the femur?	This is the ball-shaped part that fits into the acetabulum and is a common fracture point.
This is the ball-shaped part that fits into the acetabulum and is a common fracture point.	What is the head of the femur?
What connects the head of the femur to the shaft?	These are connected by the femoral neck, a common site for fractures, especially in the older population.
These are connected by the femoral neck, a common site for fractures, especially in the older population.	What connects the head of the femur to the shaft?
What is the name for the upper part of the femur?	This is called the greater trochanter.
This is called the greater trochanter.	What is the name for the upper part of the femur?
What is the name for the lower part of the femur?	This is called the lesser trochanter.
This is called the lesser trochanter.	What is the name for the lower part of the femur?
What are the two bones of the lower leg?	This consists of two bones, the tibia and fibula.
This consists of two bones, the tibia and fibula.	What are the two bones of the lower leg?
What is the tibia?	This connects to the patella to form the knee joint and runs down the front of the lower leg.
This connects to the patella to form the knee joint and runs down the front of the lower leg.	What is the tibia?
What is the fibula?	This runs behind and beside the tibia; it is much smaller. It is not a component of the knee joint, but it does make up the outer knob of the ankle joint.
This runs behind and beside the tibia; it is much smaller. It is not a component of the knee joint, but it does make up the outer knob of the ankle joint.	What is the fibula?
What are the three classes of foot bones?	These 3 are: the tarsals (ankle bones) the metatarsals (foot bones) and the phalanges (toe bones)
These 3 are: the tarsals (ankle bones) the metatarsals (foot bones) and the phalanges (toe bones)	What are the three classes of foot bones?
What is the calcaneus?	This is the largest of the tarsal bones; it is also known as the heel bone, and is subject to injury when a person jumps from a height and lands on the feet.
This is the largest of the tarsal bones; it is also known as the heel bone, and is subject to injury when a person jumps from a height and lands on the feet.	What is the calcaneus?
What is a joint?	This is formed whenever two bones come into contact.
This is formed whenever two bones come into contact.	What is a joint?
What holds joints together?	These are held together in a tough fibrous structure known as a capsule, and supported by bands of fibrous tissue called ligaments.
These are held together in a tough fibrous structure known as a capsule, and supported by bands of fibrous tissue called ligaments.	What holds joints together?
What is the sternoclavicular joint?	This is where the sternum and the clavicle come together.
This is where the sternum and the clavicle come together.	What is the sternoclavicular joint?
What is articular cartilage?	This is a thin layer of cartilage that covers the ends of bones in moving joints; it is a pearly substance that allows the ends of the bones to glide easily.
This is a thin layer of cartilage that covers the ends of bones in moving joints; it is a pearly substance that allows the ends of the bones to glide easily.	What is articular cartilage?
What is synovial fluid?	This bathes and lubricates joints. It is also known as joint fluid.
This bathes and lubricates joints. It is also known as joint fluid.	What is synovial fluid?
What are skull sutures?	These are joints present in the first 18 months of life that fuse together during growth to create a solid, immobile, bony structure.
These are joints present in the first 18 months of life that fuse together during growth to create a solid, immobile, bony structure.	What are skull sutures?
What is a fracture?	This is a break in the continuity of the bone.
This is a break in the continuity of the bone.	What is a fracture?
What is a dislocation?	This is a disruption of a joint in which the bone ends are no longer in contact. The supporting ligaments are often torn, usually completely allowing the bone ends to separate completely from each other.
This is a disruption of a joint in which the bone ends are no longer in contact. The supporting ligaments are often torn, usually completely allowing the bone ends to separate completely from each other.	What is a dislocation?
What is fascia?	This is the fibrous tissue that surrounds and supports the muscles and neurovascular structures.
This is the fibrous tissue that surrounds and supports the muscles and neurovascular structures.	What is fascia?
What is a sprain?	This is an injury to ligaments, articular capsule, synovial membrane, and tendons crossing the joint. After the injury, the joint surfaces generally fall back into alignment, so the joint is not significantly displaced. The most severe sprains involve actual of the ligament and may allow joint dislocation. Mild sprains are caused by ligament streching rather than tearing. The most vulnerable joints are the knees, shoulders, and ankles.
This is an injury to ligaments, articular capsule, synovial membrane, and tendons crossing the joint. After the injury, the joint surfaces generally fall back into alignment, so the joint is not significantly displaced. The most severe sprains involve actual of the ligament and may allow joint dislocation. Mild sprains are caused by ligament streching rather than tearing. The most vulnerable joints are the knees, shoulders, and ankles.	What is a sprain?
What is a strain?	This is a streching or tearing of the muscle, causing pain, swelling, and bruising of the soft tissues in the area.
This is a streching or tearing of the muscle, causing pain, swelling, and bruising of the soft tissues in the area.	What is a strain?
What is the zone of injury?	This is injury to soft tissues, especially to the adjacent nerves and blood vessels, surrounding an injury to bones and joints.
This is injury to soft tissues, especially to the adjacent nerves and blood vessels, surrounding an injury to bones and joints.	What is the zone of injury?
What is the patella?	This is the kneecap.
This is the kneecap.	What is the patella?
What is an indirect force injury?	This may cause a fracture or dislocation at a distant point, as when a person falls and lands on an outstreched hand. The direct impact may cause a wrist fracture, but the indirect force can cause dislocation of the elbow or a fracture of the forearm, humerus, or even clavicle.
This may cause a fracture or dislocation at a distant point, as when a person falls and lands on an outstreched hand. The direct impact may cause a wrist fracture, but the indirect force can cause dislocation of the elbow or a fracture of the forearm, humerus, or even clavicle.	What is an indirect force injury?
What is a closed fracture?	This is a fracture in which the skin is not broken.
This is a fracture in which the skin is not broken.	What is a closed fracture?
What is an open fracture?	This is a fracture in which there is an external wound, caused either by the same blow that fractured the bone or by the broken bone ends lacerating the skin.
This is a fracture in which there is an external wound, caused either by the same blow that fractured the bone or by the broken bone ends lacerating the skin.	What is an open fracture?
What is a nondisplaced fracture?	This is a simple crack of the bone in which the bone has not moved from its normal position. It is also called a hairline fracture.
This is a simple crack of the bone in which the bone has not moved from its normal position. It is also called a hairline fracture.	What is a nondisplaced fracture?
What is a displaced fracture?	This produces actual deformity, or distortion, of the limb by shortening, rotating, or angulating it; it can be associated with crepitus.
This produces actual deformity, or distortion, of the limb by shortening, rotating, or angulating it; it can be associated with crepitus.	What is a displaced fracture?
What is a greenstick fracture?	This is an incomplete fracture that passes only partway through the shaft of a bone but may still cause substantial angulation; occurs in children.
This is an incomplete fracture that passes only partway through the shaft of a bone but may still cause substantial angulation; occurs in children.	What is a greenstick fracture?
What is a comminuted fracture?	This is a fracture in which the bone is broken into more than two fractures.
This is a fracture in which the bone is broken into more than two fractures.	What is a comminuted fracture?
What is a pathologic fracture?	This is a fracture of weakened or diseased bone, seen in patients with osteoprosis or cancer, generally produced by minimal force.
This is a fracture of weakened or diseased bone, seen in patients with osteoprosis or cancer, generally produced by minimal force.	What is a pathologic fracture?
What is an epiphyseal fracture?	This is a fracture that occurs in a growth section of a child's bone and may lead to growth abnormalities.
This is a fracture that occurs in a growth section of a child's bone and may lead to growth abnormalities.	What is an epiphyseal fracture?
What is an oblique fracture?	This is a fracture in which the bone is broken at an angle across the bone. This is usually the result of a sharp angled blow to the bone.
This is a fracture in which the bone is broken at an angle across the bone. This is usually the result of a sharp angled blow to the bone.	What is an oblique fracture?
What is a transverse fracture?	This is a fracture that occurs straight across the bone. This is usually the result of a direct blow or stress fracture caused by prolonged running.
This is a fracture that occurs straight across the bone. This is usually the result of a direct blow or stress fracture caused by prolonged running.	What is a transverse fracture?
What is a spiral fracture?	This is a fracture caused by a twisting force, causing an oblique fracture around the bone and through the bone. This is often the result of abuse in very young children.
This is a fracture caused by a twisting force, causing an oblique fracture around the bone and through the bone. This is often the result of abuse in very young children.	What is a spiral fracture?
What is an incomplete fracture?	This is a fracture that does not run completely through the bone; a nondisplaced partial crack.
This is a fracture that does not run completely through the bone; a nondisplaced partial crack.	What is an incomplete fracture?
What is the most reliable indicator of an underlying fracture?	This is point tenderness on palpation in the zone of injury.
This is point tenderness on palpation in the zone of injury.	What is the most reliable indicator of an underlying fracture?
How long after a fracture may fluid build-up and swelling occur?	This may occur several hours after a fracture.
This may occur several hours after a fracture.	How long after a fracture may fluid build-up and swelling occur?
What is crepitus?	This is a grating or grinding sensation that can sometimes be felt and/or heard when fractured bone ends rub together.
This is a grating or grinding sensation that can sometimes be felt and/or heard when fractured bone ends rub together.	What is crepitus?
What is flase motion?	This is motion at a point in the limb where there is no joint. Also called free movement, it is a positive indication of a fracture.
This is motion at a point in the limb where there is no joint. Also called free movement, it is a positive indication of a fracture.	What is flase motion?
What does it mean when a dislocated joint spontaneously reduces?	This means the joint will return to its normal position .
This means the joint will return to its normal position .	What does it mean when a dislocated joint spontaneously reduces?
What are the signs and symptoms of a dislocated joint?	The signs and symptoms of this are: Marked deformity Swelling Pain that is aggravated by any attempt at movement Tenderness on palpation Virtually complete loss of normal joint motion (locked joint) Numbness or impaired circulation to the limb or digit
The signs and symptoms of this are: Marked deformity Swelling Pain that is aggravated by any attempt at movement Tenderness on palpation Virtually complete loss of normal joint motion (locked joint) Numbness or impaired circulation to the limb or digit	What are the signs and symptoms of a dislocated joint?
Where do sprains occur most often?	These occur most often in the knee and the ankle, though they can occur anywhere.
These occur most often in the knee and the ankle, though they can occur anywhere.	Where do sprains occur most often?
What are the signs and symptoms of a sprain?	The signs and symptoms of this are: Point tenderness can be elicited over the injured ligaments Swelling and ecchymosis appear at the point of injury to the ligament as a result of torn blood vessels Pain prevents the patient from moving or using the limb normally Instability of the joint us indicated by increased motion, especially at the knee; however, this may be masked by severe swelling and guarding
The signs and symptoms of this are: Point tenderness can be elicited over the injured ligaments Swelling and ecchymosis appear at the point of injury to the ligament as a result of torn blood vessels Pain prevents the patient from moving or using the limb normally Instability of the joint us indicated by increased motion, especially at the knee; however, this may be masked by severe swelling and guarding	What are the signs and symptoms of a sprain?
What should you general approach be with ankle trauama?	With this, always focus on determing the MOI.
With this, always focus on determing the MOI.	What should you general approach be with ankle trauama?
When does compartment syndrome most commonly occur, and when does it develop?	This most commonly occurs with a fractured tibia or forearm of children and is often overlooked, especially in patients with an altered level of consciousness. It typically develops within 6 to 12 hours after injury, usually as a result of excessive bleeding, a severely crushed extremity, or the rapid return of blood to an ischemic limb.
This most commonly occurs with a fractured tibia or forearm of children and is often overlooked, especially in patients with an altered level of consciousness. It typically develops within 6 to 12 hours after injury, usually as a result of excessive bleeding, a severely crushed extremity, or the rapid return of blood to an ischemic limb.	When does compartment syndrome most commonly occur, and when does it develop?
What are the signs and symptoms of compartment syndrome?	This is characterized by pain that is out of proportion to the injury, pain on passive strech of muscles within the compartment, pallor, decreased sensation, and decreased power.
This is characterized by pain that is out of proportion to the injury, pain on passive strech of muscles within the compartment, pallor, decreased sensation, and decreased power.	What are the signs and symptoms of compartment syndrome?
Why is any suspected open fracture or vascular injury considered a medical emergency?	These are always considered medical emergencies, as in an extremity with anything less than complete circulation, prolonged hypoperfusion can cause significant damage.
These are always considered medical emergencies, as in an extremity with anything less than complete circulation, prolonged hypoperfusion can cause significant damage.	Why is any suspected open fracture or vascular injury considered a medical emergency?
What are some examples of minor musculoskeletal injuries?	Some examples of this are minor sprains and fractures or dislocations of digits.
Some examples of this are minor sprains and fractures or dislocations of digits.	What are some examples of minor musculoskeletal injuries?
What are some examples of moderate musculoskeletal injuries?	Some examples of this are open fractures of digits, nondisplaced long-bone fractures, nondisplaced pelvic fractures major sprains of a major joint.
Some examples of this are open fractures of digits, nondisplaced long-bone fractures, nondisplaced pelvic fractures major sprains of a major joint.	What are some examples of moderate musculoskeletal injuries?
What are some examples of severe musculoskeletal injuries?	Some examples of this are: Displaced long-bone fractures Multiple hand and foot fractures Open long-bone fractures Displaced pelvic fractures Dislocations of major joints Multiple digit amputations Laceration of major nerves or blood vessels
Some examples of this are: Displaced long-bone fractures Multiple hand and foot fractures Open long-bone fractures Displaced pelvic fractures Dislocations of major joints Multiple digit amputations Laceration of major nerves or blood vessels	What are some examples of severe musculoskeletal injuries?
What are some examples severe, life-threatening musculoskeletal injuries (survival is probable)?	Some examples of this include: Multiple closed fractures Limb amputations Fractures of both long bones of the legs (bilateral femur fractures
Some examples of this include: Multiple closed fractures Limb amputations Fractures of both long bones of the legs (bilateral femur fractures	What are some examples severe, life-threatening musculoskeletal injuries (survival is probable)?
What are some examples of critical musculoskeletal injuries (survival is uncertain)?	Some examples of this include: Multiple open fractures of the limbs Suspected pelvic fractures with hemodynamic instability
Some examples of this include: Multiple open fractures of the limbs Suspected pelvic fractures with hemodynamic instability	What are some examples of critical musculoskeletal injuries (survival is uncertain)?
What does a patient with bilateral fractures of the long bones (humerus, femur, or tibia) indicate?	This indicates that the patient has been subjected to a high amount of kinetic energy, which should dramatically increase your index of suspicion for serious unseen injuries.
This indicates that the patient has been subjected to a high amount of kinetic energy, which should dramatically increase your index of suspicion for serious unseen injuries.	What does a patient with bilateral fractures of the long bones (humerus, femur, or tibia) indicate?
What are the 6 Ps of injured limb examination?	These are: Pain, Paralysis Paresthesias (numbness or tingling), Pulselessness, Pallor, and Pressure
These are: Pain, Paralysis Paresthesias (numbness or tingling), Pulselessness, Pallor, and Pressure	What are the 6 Ps of injured limb examination?
What should you always do before and after splinting a patient?	You should always check circulation, motor function, and sensation before and after this.
You should always check circulation, motor function, and sensation before and after this.	What should you always do before and after splinting a patient?
What are the steps to follow when caring for a patient with musculoskeletal injuries?	"With these types of patients, you should: 1) Remove any jewelry. 2) Completely cover any open wounds with dry, sterile dressing, and apply direct pressure to control bleeding (use a tourniquet if bleeding cannot be controlled). 3) Apply the appropriate splint, and elevate the extremity approx. 6"" to minimize swelling. 4) If swelling is present, apply cold packs to the area. 5) Prepate the patient for transport."
"With these types of patients, you should: 1) Remove any jewelry. 2) Completely cover any open wounds with dry, sterile dressing, and apply direct pressure to control bleeding (use a tourniquet if bleeding cannot be controlled). 3) Apply the appropriate splint, and elevate the extremity approx. 6"" to minimize swelling. 4) If swelling is present, apply cold packs to the area. 5) Prepate the patient for transport."	What are the steps to follow when caring for a patient with musculoskeletal injuries?
What is a splint?	This is a flexible or rigid device that is used to protect and maintain the position of an injured extremity.
This is a flexible or rigid device that is used to protect and maintain the position of an injured extremity.	What is a splint?
How is splinting useful?	This is useful as it prevents: 1) movement of fracture fragments, bone ends, dislocated joints, or damaged soft tissue, reducing pain. 2) further damage to muscles, spinal cords, nerves, and blood vessels. 3) laceration of the skin by broken bone ends (one of the primary indications for this is to prevent a closed fracture from becoming an open fracture.) 4) restriction of distal blood flow resulting from pressure of the bone ends on blood vessels and 5) paralysis of extremities resulting from a damaged spine.
This is useful as it prevents: 1) movement of fracture fragments, bone ends, dislocated joints, or damaged soft tissue, reducing pain. 2) further damage to muscles, spinal cords, nerves, and blood vessels. 3) laceration of the skin by broken bone ends (one of the primary indications for this is to prevent a closed fracture from becoming an open fracture.) 4) restriction of distal blood flow resulting from pressure of the bone ends on blood vessels and 5) paralysis of extremities resulting from a damaged spine.	How is splinting useful?
What are the 13 general principles of splinting?	The 13 general principles of this are: 1) Remove clothing from the area so you can inspect for DCAP-BTLS 2) Take CSM 3) Cover all wounds with dry, sterile dressing 4) Do not move the patient prior to application unless there is immediate danger 5) In a suspected fracture of the shaft, be sure to stabilize the joints above and below the fracture 6) With injuries in and around the joint, be sure to stabilize the bones above and below the injured joint 7) Pad all straps 8) During application, maintain manual stabilization 9) If the fracture of a long-bone shaft has resulted in severe deformity, use constant, gentle manual traction to align the limb. This is especially important if the distal part of the extremity is cyanotic or pulseless. 10) If you erncounter resistance, perform the procedure with the limb in its deformed position 11) Stabilize all suspected spinal injuries in a neutral in-line position on a backboard 12) If the patient has signs of hypoperfusion, align the limb in the normal anatomic position, and provide transport 13) When in doubt, splint
The 13 general principles of this are: 1) Remove clothing from the area so you can inspect for DCAP-BTLS 2) Take CSM 3) Cover all wounds with dry, sterile dressing 4) Do not move the patient prior to application unless there is immediate danger 5) In a suspected fracture of the shaft, be sure to stabilize the joints above and below the fracture 6) With injuries in and around the joint, be sure to stabilize the bones above and below the injured joint 7) Pad all straps 8) During application, maintain manual stabilization 9) If the fracture of a long-bone shaft has resulted in severe deformity, use constant, gentle manual traction to align the limb. This is especially important if the distal part of the extremity is cyanotic or pulseless. 10) If you erncounter resistance, perform the procedure with the limb in its deformed position 11) Stabilize all suspected spinal injuries in a neutral in-line position on a backboard 12) If the patient has signs of hypoperfusion, align the limb in the normal anatomic position, and provide transport 13) When in doubt, splint	What are the 13 general principles of splinting?
What is traction?	This is the act of pulling on a body structure in the direction of its normal alignment. It is the most effective way to realign a fracture of the shaft of a long bone so that the limb can be splinted more effectively.
This is the act of pulling on a body structure in the direction of its normal alignment. It is the most effective way to realign a fracture of the shaft of a long bone so that the limb can be splinted more effectively.	What is traction?
What should you NOT attempt to do with traction?	When doing this, remember you should not attempt to reduce the fracture or force all of the bone fragments back into alignment. This is the physician's responsibility.
When doing this, remember you should not attempt to reduce the fracture or force all of the bone fragments back into alignment. This is the physician's responsibility.	What should you NOT attempt to do with traction?
What should you do before applying a traction splint?	Before applying this, be sure to control any external bleeding.
Before applying this, be sure to control any external bleeding.	What should you do before applying a traction splint?
How much force is required for proper traction?	This varies, but often does not exceed 15 lb.
This varies, but often does not exceed 15 lb.	How much force is required for proper traction?
What are the two situations in which you must splint the limb in the position of deformity?	You must do this when: 1) the deformity is severe, as is the case with many dislocations, and 2) when you encounter resistance or extreme pain when applying gentle traction to the fracture of a shaft of a long bone.
You must do this when: 1) the deformity is severe, as is the case with many dislocations, and 2) when you encounter resistance or extreme pain when applying gentle traction to the fracture of a shaft of a long bone.	What are the two situations in which you must splint the limb in the position of deformity?
What is the most commonly used formable or soft splint?	The most commonly used one of these is the precontured, inflatable, clear plastic air splint.
The most commonly used one of these is the precontured, inflatable, clear plastic air splint.	What is the most commonly used formable or soft splint?
What is something to consider regarding air splints?	With these, remember that significant changes in the weather affect the pressure of the air in the splint, which decreases as the environment grows colder and increases as the environment grows warmer. The same thing happens when there changes in altitude, which can be a problem with helicopter transport of patients.
With these, remember that significant changes in the weather affect the pressure of the air in the splint, which decreases as the environment grows colder and increases as the environment grows warmer. The same thing happens when there changes in altitude, which can be a problem with helicopter transport of patients.	What is something to consider regarding air splints?
When are traction splints primarily used?	They are used primarily to secure fractures of the shaft of the femur, characterized by pain, swelling, and deformity of the midthigh.
They are used primarily to secure fractures of the shaft of the femur, characterized by pain, swelling, and deformity of the midthigh.	When are traction splints primarily used?
When should you NOT use traction splints?	Do not use this for any of the following conditions: 1) Injuries of the upper extremity. 2) Injuries close to or involving the knee. 3) Injuries of the hip. 4) Injuries of the pelvis. 5) Partial amputations or avulsions with bone separation. And 6) Lower leg, foot, or ankle injury.
Do not use this for any of the following conditions: 1) Injuries of the upper extremity. 2) Injuries close to or involving the knee. 3) Injuries of the hip. 4) Injuries of the pelvis. 5) Partial amputations or avulsions with bone separation. And 6) Lower leg, foot, or ankle injury.	When should you NOT use traction splints?
What are pelvic binders?	These are used to splint the bony pelvis to reduce hemorrhage from bone ends, venous disruption, and pain. They are easily applied by one person, and should allow access to the abdomen, perineum, anus, and groin for examination and diagnostic testing.
These are used to splint the bony pelvis to reduce hemorrhage from bone ends, venous disruption, and pain. They are easily applied by one person, and should allow access to the abdomen, perineum, anus, and groin for examination and diagnostic testing.	What are pelvic binders?
When should you not use PASGs?	Do not use this if any of the following conditions exist: Pregnancy, Pulmonary edema, Acute heart failure, Penetrating chest injuries, Groin injuries, Major head injuries, And a transport time of less than 30 minutes
Do not use this if any of the following conditions exist: Pregnancy, Pulmonary edema, Acute heart failure, Penetrating chest injuries, Groin injuries, Major head injuries, And a transport time of less than 30 minutes	When should you not use PASGs?
What is a general rule for PASGs?	As a general rule with these, gradually inflate the legs before inflating the abdominal portion.
As a general rule with these, gradually inflate the legs before inflating the abdominal portion.	What is a general rule for PASGs?
What are some hazards associated with the improper application of splints?	The following hazards are associated with this: Compression of nerves, tissues, and blood vessels Delay in transport of a patient with a life-threatening injury Reduction of distal circulation Aggravation of the injury Injury to tissue, nerves, blood vessels, or muscles as a result of excessive movement of the bone or joint.
The following hazards are associated with this: Compression of nerves, tissues, and blood vessels Delay in transport of a patient with a life-threatening injury Reduction of distal circulation Aggravation of the injury Injury to tissue, nerves, blood vessels, or muscles as a result of excessive movement of the bone or joint.	What are some hazards associated with the improper application of splints?
What is one of the most commonly fractured bone in the body?	The clavicle, or collarbone, is this.
The clavicle, or collarbone, is this.	What is one of the most commonly fractured bone in the body?
What is a another name for the scapula?	Another name for this is shoulder blade.
Another name for this is shoulder blade.	What is a another name for the scapula?
What is the acromioclavicular (AC) joint?	This is the joint between the outer end of the clavicle and the acromion process of the scapula. Dislocation of this is called an AC separation.
This is the joint between the outer end of the clavicle and the acromion process of the scapula. Dislocation of this is called an AC separation.	What is the acromioclavicular (AC) joint?
What is a sling?	This is any bandage or material that helps support the weight of an injured upper extremity, relieving the downward pull of gravity on the injured site.
This is any bandage or material that helps support the weight of an injured upper extremity, relieving the downward pull of gravity on the injured site.	What is a sling?
What is a swathe?	This is a bandage that passses completely around the chest to stabilize the arm.
This is a bandage that passses completely around the chest to stabilize the arm.	What is a swathe?
What is the glenoid fossa?	This is the part of the scapula that joins with the head of the humerus, forming the glenhumeral joint (shoulder joint).
This is the part of the scapula that joins with the head of the humerus, forming the glenhumeral joint (shoulder joint).	What is the glenoid fossa?
What symptoms indicate a shoulder dislocation?	The symptoms of this condition are as follows: The shoulder joint will usually be locked, and the sholder will appear squared off or flattened. The humeral head will protrude anteriorly underneath the pectoralis major on the anterior chest wall. As a result, the anxillary nerve may be compressed, causing a numb patch on the outer aspect of the shoulder. Be sure to document this finding.
The symptoms of this condition are as follows: The shoulder joint will usually be locked, and the sholder will appear squared off or flattened. The humeral head will protrude anteriorly underneath the pectoralis major on the anterior chest wall. As a result, the anxillary nerve may be compressed, causing a numb patch on the outer aspect of the shoulder. Be sure to document this finding.	What symptoms indicate a shoulder dislocation?
Why is stabilizing an anterior shoulder dislocation difficult?	This is difficult because any attempt to bring the arm in toward the chest will produce pain. You must splint the joint in whatever position is most comfortable for the patient, so if necessary, place a pillow or rolled blanket or towels between the arm and chest to fill up the space between them.
This is difficult because any attempt to bring the arm in toward the chest will produce pain. You must splint the joint in whatever position is most comfortable for the patient, so if necessary, place a pillow or rolled blanket or towels between the arm and chest to fill up the space between them.	Why is stabilizing an anterior shoulder dislocation difficult?
Where do fractures of the humerus occur?	They occur either: proximally at the midshaft, or distally at the elbow.
They occur either: proximally at the midshaft, or distally at the elbow.	Where do fractures of the humerus occur?
What is another name for a fracture of the distal humerus?	This is also known as a supracondylar or intercondylar fracture.
This is also known as a supracondylar or intercondylar fracture.	What is another name for a fracture of the distal humerus?
What kind of fracture is common in children?	Fracture of the distal humerus (supracondylar or intercondylar fracture) are common with this group.
Fracture of the distal humerus (supracondylar or intercondylar fracture) are common with this group.	What kind of fracture is common in children?
What is a common deformity of a dislocated elbow?	A common deformity of this is the posterior displacement of the ulna and radius, which makes the olecranon process of the ulna much more prominent.
A common deformity of this is the posterior displacement of the ulna and radius, which makes the olecranon process of the ulna much more prominent.	What is a common deformity of a dislocated elbow?
What generally causes fractures of the radial head?	These are generally caused from direct or indirect forces and is often associated with lacerations and abrasions.
These are generally caused from direct or indirect forces and is often associated with lacerations and abrasions.	What generally causes fractures of the radial head?
What does a cold, pale hand or a weak or absent pulse and poor capillary refill in a patient with an elbow injury indicate?	These indicate that blood vessels have likely been injured. Notify medical control immediately and provide prompt transport.
These indicate that blood vessels have likely been injured. Notify medical control immediately and provide prompt transport.	What does a cold, pale hand or a weak or absent pulse and poor capillary refill in a patient with an elbow injury indicate?
What should you do if a limb is pulseless and significantly deformed at the elbow?	In this situation, you should gently apply manual traction in line with the long axis of the limb to decrease the deformity. This may restore the pulse, but if no pulse returns after one attempt, splint in the most comfortable position for the patient.
In this situation, you should gently apply manual traction in line with the long axis of the limb to decrease the deformity. This may restore the pulse, but if no pulse returns after one attempt, splint in the most comfortable position for the patient.	What should you do if a limb is pulseless and significantly deformed at the elbow?
What is a nightstick fracture?	This is a fracture on the shaft of the ulnaas a result of a direct blow.
This is a fracture on the shaft of the ulnaas a result of a direct blow.	What is a nightstick fracture?
What are Colles fractures?	These are fractures of the distal radius, and are common in elderly patients with osteoporosis.
These are fractures of the distal radius, and are common in elderly patients with osteoporosis.	What are Colles fractures?
"What is ""silver fork deformity""?"	This is the distinctive appearance of a distal radius fracture.
This is the distinctive appearance of a distal radius fracture.	"What is ""silver fork deformity""?"
What is something you can do to alleviate swelling in extremity fractures?	In this situation, you can elevate the injured extremity above the heart.
In this situation, you can elevate the injured extremity above the heart.	What is something you can do to alleviate swelling in extremity fractures?
What is a common wrist injury?	A common one of these is the isolated, nondisplaced fracture of a carpal bone, especially the scaphoid.
A common one of these is the isolated, nondisplaced fracture of a carpal bone, especially the scaphoid.	What is a common wrist injury?
What is the position of function?	This is a hand position in which the wrist is slightly dorsiflexed and all finger joints are moderately flexed.
This is a hand position in which the wrist is slightly dorsiflexed and all finger joints are moderately flexed.	What is the position of function?
What is the retroperitoneal space?	This is the space between the abdominal cavity and the posterior abdominal wall, containing the kidneys, certain large vessels, and parts of the gastrointestinal tract.
This is the space between the abdominal cavity and the posterior abdominal wall, containing the kidneys, certain large vessels, and parts of the gastrointestinal tract.	What is the retroperitoneal space?
What is an important consideration regarding pelvic fractures?	These types of injuries may be accompanied by life-threatening loss of blood from the laceration of blood vessels affixed to the pelvis at certain key points. Several liters of blood may drain into the pelvic space and the retroperitoneal space. You must take immediate steps to treat shock, even if there is only minimal swelling.
These types of injuries may be accompanied by life-threatening loss of blood from the laceration of blood vessels affixed to the pelvis at certain key points. Several liters of blood may drain into the pelvic space and the retroperitoneal space. You must take immediate steps to treat shock, even if there is only minimal swelling.	What is an important consideration regarding pelvic fractures?
When should you suspect a pelvic fracture?	You should suspect this injury whenever a patient has sustained a high-velocity injury and complains of discomfort in the lower back or abdomen (deformity or swelling may be difficult to see).
You should suspect this injury whenever a patient has sustained a high-velocity injury and complains of discomfort in the lower back or abdomen (deformity or swelling may be difficult to see).	When should you suspect a pelvic fracture?
How should you palpate the pelvis?	To perform this palpation: 1) Place the palms of your hands over the lateral aspect of each iliac crest, and apply firm but gentle inward pressure on the pelvic ring. 2) With the patient lying supine, place a palm over the anterior aspect of weach iliac crest, and apply firm downward pressure. 3) Use your palm to firmly but gently palpate the pubic symphysis. The area will be tender if there is injury to the anterior portion of the pelvic ring.
To perform this palpation: 1) Place the palms of your hands over the lateral aspect of each iliac crest, and apply firm but gentle inward pressure on the pelvic ring. 2) With the patient lying supine, place a palm over the anterior aspect of weach iliac crest, and apply firm downward pressure. 3) Use your palm to firmly but gently palpate the pubic symphysis. The area will be tender if there is injury to the anterior portion of the pelvic ring.	How should you palpate the pelvis?
What most commonly causes hip dislocations?	These are most commonly caused by automobile accidents in which the knee meets with a direct force, such as the dashboard.
These are most commonly caused by automobile accidents in which the knee meets with a direct force, such as the dashboard.	What most commonly causes hip dislocations?
What is a frequent complication of posterior dislocation of the hip?	A frequent complication of this is injury to the sciatic nerve.
A frequent complication of this is injury to the sciatic nerve.	What is a frequent complication of posterior dislocation of the hip?
What is the sciatic nerve?	This is the most important nerve in the lower extremity; it controls the activity of muscles in the posterior thigh and below the knee and the sensation in most of the leg and foot.
This is the most important nerve in the lower extremity; it controls the activity of muscles in the posterior thigh and below the knee and the sensation in most of the leg and foot.	What is the sciatic nerve?
What is a sign of sciatic nerve injury?	"Decreased sensation in the leg and foot, and the characteristic ""foot drop"" are signs of this."
"Decreased sensation in the leg and foot, and the characteristic ""foot drop"" are signs of this."	What is a sign of sciatic nerve injury?
In what position do patients with posterior dislocation of the hip typically lie?	This type of patient typically lie with the hip joint flexed and the thigh rotated inward toward the midline of the body over the top of the opposite thigh.
This type of patient typically lie with the hip joint flexed and the thigh rotated inward toward the midline of the body over the top of the opposite thigh.	In what position do patients with posterior dislocation of the hip typically lie?
What are the three types of proximal femur fractures?	The three types of this injury are: 1) a fracture through the neck of the femur 2) the intertrochanteric (middle) region and 3) across the proximal shaft of the femur (subtrochanteric fractures).
The three types of this injury are: 1) a fracture through the neck of the femur 2) the intertrochanteric (middle) region and 3) across the proximal shaft of the femur (subtrochanteric fractures).	What are the three types of proximal femur fractures?
What typically occurs following a femoral shaft fracture?	"Following this type of injury, muscles spasm in an attempt to ""splint"" the unstable limb, causing significant deformity and shorterning of the limb."
"Following this type of injury, muscles spasm in an attempt to ""splint"" the unstable limb, causing significant deformity and shorterning of the limb."	What typically occurs following a femoral shaft fracture?
How many mL of blood can be lost as a result of a fracture of the femur shaft?	As much as 500 to 1,000 mL of blood can be lost as a result of this injury.
As much as 500 to 1,000 mL of blood can be lost as a result of this injury.	How many mL of blood can be lost as a result of a fracture of the femur shaft?
Which knee ligaments are most frequently injured?	The ligaments on the medial side of this joint are most frequently injured, typically when the foot is fixed to the ground and the lateral aspect is struck by a heavy object.
The ligaments on the medial side of this joint are most frequently injured, typically when the foot is fixed to the ground and the lateral aspect is struck by a heavy object.	Which knee ligaments are most frequently injured?
What should you do with all suspected knee ligament injuries?	You should always splint all suspected injuries of this type. If you encounter resistance or pain when trying to straighten the limb, splint in the flexed position.
You should always splint all suspected injuries of this type. If you encounter resistance or pain when trying to straighten the limb, splint in the flexed position.	What should you do with all suspected knee ligament injuries?
How significant are knee dislocations?	These are true emergencies that may threaten the limb.
These are true emergencies that may threaten the limb.	How significant are knee dislocations?
What is the most common type of knee dislocations?	Anterior dislocations, which results from extreme hyperextension, are the most common kind of this injury.
Anterior dislocations, which results from extreme hyperextension, are the most common kind of this injury.	What is the most common type of knee dislocations?
What are some possible complications from knee dislocations?	Complications of this type of injury include limb-threatening popliteal artery disruption, injuries to the nerves, and joint instability.
Complications of this type of injury include limb-threatening popliteal artery disruption, injuries to the nerves, and joint instability.	What are some possible complications from knee dislocations?
How should you splint a knee dislocation if the knee is bent and the foot has a good pulse?	In this situation, splint the joint in the bent position.
In this situation, splint the joint in the bent position.	How should you splint a knee dislocation if the knee is bent and the foot has a good pulse?
What may medical control direct you to do on rare occasions with knee dislocations?	In this situation, medical control may direct you realigned a deformed, pulseless limb to reduce compression of the popliteal artery, thus restoring distal circulation.
In this situation, medical control may direct you realigned a deformed, pulseless limb to reduce compression of the popliteal artery, thus restoring distal circulation.	What may medical control direct you to do on rare occasions with knee dislocations?
What is it easy to confuse fractures about the knee with/	These can frequently be confused with ligament injuries.
These can frequently be confused with ligament injuries.	What is it easy to confuse fractures about the knee with/
What should you do if there is an adequate distal pulse and no significant deformity with a fracture about the knee?	In this situation, splint the limb with the knee straight.
In this situation, splint the limb with the knee straight.	What should you do if there is an adequate distal pulse and no significant deformity with a fracture about the knee?
What should you do if there is an adequate distal pulse and significant deformity with a fracture about the knee?	In this situation, splint the joint in the position of deformity.
In this situation, splint the joint in the position of deformity.	What should you do if there is an adequate distal pulse and significant deformity with a fracture about the knee?
What should you do if there is no pulse below the level of the injury?	In this situation, suspect possible vascular and nerve damage, and contact medical control immediately for further instructions.
In this situation, suspect possible vascular and nerve damage, and contact medical control immediately for further instructions.	What should you do if there is no pulse below the level of the injury?
What should you do if you suspect a fractured knee?	With this injury, never use a traction splint.
With this injury, never use a traction splint.	What should you do if you suspect a fractured knee?
Where does the patella usually displace to?	This usually displaces to the lateral side.
This usually displaces to the lateral side.	Where does the patella usually displace to?
How should you splint the knee with a dislocated patella?	With this injury, splint the knee in which you found it often moderately flexed).
With this injury, splint the knee in which you found it often moderately flexed).	How should you splint the knee with a dislocated patella?
How should you stabilize fractures of the tibia and fibula?	With these injuries, the bones should be stabilized with a padded, rigid long leg splint, or an air splint that extends from the foot to the upper thigh. Once splinted, the affected leg should be secured to the opposite leg.
With these injuries, the bones should be stabilized with a padded, rigid long leg splint, or an air splint that extends from the foot to the upper thigh. Once splinted, the affected leg should be secured to the opposite leg.	How should you stabilize fractures of the tibia and fibula?
How should you generally manage the wide spectrum of injuries to the ankle?	Manage these types of injuries as follows: 1) Dress all open wounds 2) Assess distal neurovascular function 3) Correct any gross deformity by gently applying longitudinal traction to the heel 4) Before releasing traction, apply a splint.
Manage these types of injuries as follows: 1) Dress all open wounds 2) Assess distal neurovascular function 3) Correct any gross deformity by gently applying longitudinal traction to the heel 4) Before releasing traction, apply a splint.	How should you generally manage the wide spectrum of injuries to the ankle?
What bone is most commonly fractured in foot injuries?	The most common fractured bone in this situation is the calcaneus.
The most common fractured bone in this situation is the calcaneus.	What bone is most commonly fractured in foot injuries?
What should you be aware of when a patient who has fallen from a height complains of heel pain?	In this situation, be aware of back pain complaints, and check the spine for tenderness and deformity.
In this situation, be aware of back pain complaints, and check the spine for tenderness and deformity.	What should you be aware of when a patient who has fallen from a height complains of heel pain?
What should you remember remember when splinting an injured foot?	When doing this, remember to leave a toe exposed so you can check for a distal pulse.
When doing this, remember to leave a toe exposed so you can check for a distal pulse.	What should you remember remember when splinting an injured foot?
If you have a pediatric patient with a fracture below the elbow or knee, what might the following symptoms indicate: extreme pain, decreased pain sensation, pain on streching of affected muscles, and decreased power?	In this situation, these symptoms indicate that the pressure within a fascial compartment is elevated.
In this situation, these symptoms indicate that the pressure within a fascial compartment is elevated.	If you have a pediatric patient with a fracture below the elbow or knee, what might the following symptoms indicate: extreme pain, decreased pain sensation, pain on streching of affected muscles, and decreased power?
What indicates a strain?	"This type of injury often has no deformity and only minor swelling; some patients report a ""snap"" when a muscle tears and complain of increased sharp pain with passive movement of the injured extremity."
"This type of injury often has no deformity and only minor swelling; some patients report a ""snap"" when a muscle tears and complain of increased sharp pain with passive movement of the injured extremity."	What indicates a strain?
What is the general treatment of strains and sprains?	Treatment of this injury includes the following: 1) Immobilize or splint the injured area 2) Ice or cold pack over the injury 3) Compression with an elastic bandage 4) Elevation 5) Reduced weight bearing 6) Pain management
Treatment of this injury includes the following: 1) Immobilize or splint the injured area 2) Ice or cold pack over the injury 3) Compression with an elastic bandage 4) Elevation 5) Reduced weight bearing 6) Pain management	What is the general treatment of strains and sprains?
What usually causes sprains?	These are usually caused by a sudden twisting of a joint beyond its normal range of motion that also causes a temporary subluxation.
These are usually caused by a sudden twisting of a joint beyond its normal range of motion that also causes a temporary subluxation.	What usually causes sprains?
What usually characterizes a sprain?	These are typically characterized by pain, swelling (edema) at the joint, discoloration over the injured joint, and point tenderness.
These are typically characterized by pain, swelling (edema) at the joint, discoloration over the injured joint, and point tenderness.	What usually characterizes a sprain?
If your patient greets you with a hoarse voice or is reported to have been in an enclosed space with a fire or intense heat source, what does this indicate?	These signs indicate a significant MOI, and the airway should be carefully monitored.
These signs indicate a significant MOI, and the airway should be carefully monitored.	If your patient greets you with a hoarse voice or is reported to have been in an enclosed space with a fire or intense heat source, what does this indicate?
What is one of the first signs of hypoperfusion?	One of the first signs of this is a change in mental status, such as anxiety, restlessness, or combativeness.
One of the first signs of this is a change in mental status, such as anxiety, restlessness, or combativeness.	What is one of the first signs of hypoperfusion?
What are the later signs of hypoperfusion suggesting internal bleeding?	Later signs of this include: Tachycardia Weakness, fainting, or dizziness at rest Thirst Nausea and vomiting Cold, moist skin Shallow, rapid breathing Dull eyes Slightly dilated pupils that are non-reactive to light Capillary refill of more than 2 seconds in infants and children Weak, rapid (thready) pulse Decreasing blood pressure Altered level of consciousness
Later signs of this include: Tachycardia Weakness, fainting, or dizziness at rest Thirst Nausea and vomiting Cold, moist skin Shallow, rapid breathing Dull eyes Slightly dilated pupils that are non-reactive to light Capillary refill of more than 2 seconds in infants and children Weak, rapid (thready) pulse Decreasing blood pressure Altered level of consciousness	What are the later signs of hypoperfusion suggesting internal bleeding?
When dealing with multiple bleeding patients, what should you remember to do?	When doing this, remember to place several pairs of gloves in your pocket for easy access.
When doing this, remember to place several pairs of gloves in your pocket for easy access.	When dealing with multiple bleeding patients, what should you remember to do?
What does a systolic blood pressure of less than 100 mg Hg with a weak, rapid pulse suggest?	This suggests the presence of hypoperfusion in a patient who may have significant bleeding.
This suggests the presence of hypoperfusion in a patient who may have significant bleeding.	What does a systolic blood pressure of less than 100 mg Hg with a weak, rapid pulse suggest?
When the MOI is a fall from a ladder striking the head, what is a potential internal bleeding source?	A potential internal bleeding source from this MOI is a head injury or hematoma.
A potential internal bleeding source from this MOI is a head injury or hematoma.	When the MOI is a fall from a ladder striking the head, what is a potential internal bleeding source?
When the MOI is a fall from a ladder striking the extremities, what is a potential internal bleeding source?	A potential internal bleeding source from this MOI is possible fractures, and also possible chest injuries.
A potential internal bleeding source from this MOI is possible fractures, and also possible chest injuries.	When the MOI is a fall from a ladder striking the extremities, what is a potential internal bleeding source?
When the MOI is a child striking a car, what is a potential internal bleeding source?	A potential internal bleeding source from this MOI is head trauma, chest and abdominal injuries, and leg fractures.
A potential internal bleeding source from this MOI is head trauma, chest and abdominal injuries, and leg fractures.	When the MOI is a child striking a car, what is a potential internal bleeding source?
When the MOI is a fall onto an outstretched arm, what is a potential internal bleeding source?	A potential internal bleeding source from this MOI is possible bone fractures and joint injuries.
A potential internal bleeding source from this MOI is possible bone fractures and joint injuries.	When the MOI is a fall onto an outstretched arm, what is a potential internal bleeding source?
When the MOI is a child thrown or falls from a height, what is a potential internal bleeding source?	A potential internal bleeding source from this MOI is head injury.
A potential internal bleeding source from this MOI is head injury.	When the MOI is a child thrown or falls from a height, what is a potential internal bleeding source?
When the MOI is an unrestrained driver in a head-on collision, what is a potential internal bleeding source?	A potential internal bleeding source from this MOI is head and neck, chest, abdominal injuries, and knee, femur, hip, or pelvis injuries.
A potential internal bleeding source from this MOI is head and neck, chest, abdominal injuries, and knee, femur, hip, or pelvis injuries.	When the MOI is an unrestrained driver in a head-on collision, what is a potential internal bleeding source?
When the MOI is an unrestrained front-seat passenger or side-impact collision with intrusion into the vehicle, what is a potential internal bleeding source?	A potential internal bleeding source from this MOI is a broken humerus exposing the chest wall (possible flail chest), as well as pelvic and acetabulum injuries.
A potential internal bleeding source from this MOI is a broken humerus exposing the chest wall (possible flail chest), as well as pelvic and acetabulum injuries.	When the MOI is an unrestrained front-seat passenger or side-impact collision with intrusion into the vehicle, what is a potential internal bleeding source?
When the MOI is an unrestrained driver crushed against the steering column, what is a potential internal bleeding source?	A potential internal bleeding source from this MOI is a chest or abdomen injury, a ruptured spleen, and neck trauma.
A potential internal bleeding source from this MOI is a chest or abdomen injury, a ruptured spleen, and neck trauma.	When the MOI is an unrestrained driver crushed against the steering column, what is a potential internal bleeding source?
When the MOI is a fall over the handlebars of a bike, what is a potential internal bleeding source?	A potential internal bleeding source from this MOI are a fractured clavicle, road rash, and head trauma if there was no helmet.
A potential internal bleeding source from this MOI are a fractured clavicle, road rash, and head trauma if there was no helmet.	When the MOI is a fall over the handlebars of a bike, what is a potential internal bleeding source?
When the MOI is an abrupt motorcycle stop, and the patient went over the handlebars, what is a potential internal bleeding source?	A potential internal bleeding source from this MOI are fractured femurs, and head or neck injuries.
A potential internal bleeding source from this MOI are fractured femurs, and head or neck injuries.	When the MOI is an abrupt motorcycle stop, and the patient went over the handlebars, what is a potential internal bleeding source?
When the MOI is diving into the shallow end of a swimming pool, what is a potential internal bleeding source?	A potential internal bleeding source from this MOI are head and neck injuries.
A potential internal bleeding source from this MOI are head and neck injuries.	When the MOI is diving into the shallow end of a swimming pool, what is a potential internal bleeding source?
When the MOI is an assault or fight, what is a potential internal bleeding source?	A potential internal bleeding source from this MOI is injury to the abdomen, chest, and face.
A potential internal bleeding source from this MOI is injury to the abdomen, chest, and face.	When the MOI is an assault or fight, what is a potential internal bleeding source?
When the MOI is a blast or explosion, what is a potential internal bleeding source?	A potential internal bleeding source from this MOI is: injury from direct strike with debris; an indirect pressure wave in an enclosed space; and, internally, air-containing organs, such as the middle of the ears and lungs, are the most susceptible to injury.
A potential internal bleeding source from this MOI is: injury from direct strike with debris; an indirect pressure wave in an enclosed space; and, internally, air-containing organs, such as the middle of the ears and lungs, are the most susceptible to injury.	When the MOI is a blast or explosion, what is a potential internal bleeding source?
With a patient with obvious external bleeding, what is the very least PPE needed?	With these patients, BSI includes at the very least gloves and eye protection, and often a mask and possibly a gown.
With these patients, BSI includes at the very least gloves and eye protection, and often a mask and possibly a gown.	With a patient with obvious external bleeding, what is the very least PPE needed?
What are the methods available to control external bleeding?	The most commonly used method to do this include: 1) Direct, even pressure and elevation 2) Pressure dressings and/or splints and 3) Tourniquiets
The most commonly used method to do this include: 1) Direct, even pressure and elevation 2) Pressure dressings and/or splints and 3) Tourniquiets	What are the methods available to control external bleeding?
How long (minimum) should you hold uninterrupted pressure on an open wound to stop bleeding?	You should do this for at least 5 minutes.
You should do this for at least 5 minutes.	How long (minimum) should you hold uninterrupted pressure on an open wound to stop bleeding?
What is a pressure point?	This is a spot where a blood vessel lies near a bone.
This is a spot where a blood vessel lies near a bone.	What is a pressure point?
What is one way to assist in the body's natural clotting process?	One way to do this is to keep the patient as still and quiet as possible.
One way to do this is to keep the patient as still and quiet as possible.	What is one way to assist in the body's natural clotting process?
What are the signs and symptoms of blunt or penetrating trauma to the neck?	Signs and symptoms of this are: Noisy or labored breathing, and swelling of the face or neck.
Signs and symptoms of this are: Noisy or labored breathing, and swelling of the face or neck.	What are the signs and symptoms of blunt or penetrating trauma to the neck?
What is the index of suspicion of blunt or penetrating trauma to the neck?	The index of suspicion of blunt or penetrating trauma to the neck is: Significant bleeding or foreign bodies in the upper or lower airway, causing obstruction; Be alert for airway compromise
The index of suspicion of blunt or penetrating trauma to the neck is: Significant bleeding or foreign bodies in the upper or lower airway, causing obstruction; Be alert for airway compromise	What is the index of suspicion of blunt or penetrating trauma to the neck?
What are the signs and symptoms of significant chest wall, blunt trauma from motor vehicle crashes, car-versus-pedestrian accidents, other crashes, and penetrating trauma to the chest wall?	Signs and symptoms of this are: Significant chest pain, shortness of breath, and asymmetrical chest wall movement.
Signs and symptoms of this are: Significant chest pain, shortness of breath, and asymmetrical chest wall movement.	What are the signs and symptoms of significant chest wall, blunt trauma from motor vehicle crashes, car-versus-pedestrian accidents, other crashes, and penetrating trauma to the chest wall?
What are the signs and symptoms of any significant blunt force trauma from motor vehicle crashes or penetrating injury?	Signs and symptoms of this are: Blunt or penetrating trauma to the neck, chest, abdomen, or groin, blows to the head sustained during motor vehicle crashes, falls, or other incidents, producing loss of consciousness, altered mental status, inability to recall events, combativeness, or changes in speech patterns, and difficulty moving extremities and headaches, especially with nausea and vomiting.
Signs and symptoms of this are: Blunt or penetrating trauma to the neck, chest, abdomen, or groin, blows to the head sustained during motor vehicle crashes, falls, or other incidents, producing loss of consciousness, altered mental status, inability to recall events, combativeness, or changes in speech patterns, and difficulty moving extremities and headaches, especially with nausea and vomiting.	What are the signs and symptoms of any significant blunt force trauma from motor vehicle crashes or penetrating injury?
What are the signs and symptoms of any significant blunt force trauma, falls from a significant height, or penetrating trauma?	Signs and symptoms of this are: Severe back and/or neck pain, a history of difficulty moving extremities, and loss of sensation or tingling in the extremities.
Signs and symptoms of this are: Severe back and/or neck pain, a history of difficulty moving extremities, and loss of sensation or tingling in the extremities.	What are the signs and symptoms of any significant blunt force trauma, falls from a significant height, or penetrating trauma?
What is the index of suspicion of significant chest wall, blunt trauma from motor vehicle crashes, car-versus-pedestrian accidents, other crashes, and penetrating trauma to the chest wall?	The index of suspicion of this is: Cardiac or pulmonary contusion; Pneumothorax or hemothorax; Broken ribs, causing breathing compromise
The index of suspicion of this is: Cardiac or pulmonary contusion; Pneumothorax or hemothorax; Broken ribs, causing breathing compromise	What is the index of suspicion of significant chest wall, blunt trauma from motor vehicle crashes, car-versus-pedestrian accidents, other crashes, and penetrating trauma to the chest wall?
What is the index of suspicion of any significant blunt force trauma from motor vehicle crashes or penetrating injury?	The index of suspicion of this is: Injuries in these regions may tear and cause damage to the large blood vessels located in these body areas, resulting in significant internal and external bleeding. Be alert to the possibility of bruising to the brain and bleeding in and around the brain tissue, which may cause the development of excess pressure inside the skull around the brain.
The index of suspicion of this is: Injuries in these regions may tear and cause damage to the large blood vessels located in these body areas, resulting in significant internal and external bleeding. Be alert to the possibility of bruising to the brain and bleeding in and around the brain tissue, which may cause the development of excess pressure inside the skull around the brain.	What is the index of suspicion of any significant blunt force trauma from motor vehicle crashes or penetrating injury?
What is the index of suspicion of any significant blunt force trauma, falls from a significant height, or penetrating trauma?	The index of suspicion of this is: Injury to the bones of the spinal column or to the spinal cord.
The index of suspicion of this is: Injury to the bones of the spinal column or to the spinal cord.	What is the index of suspicion of any significant blunt force trauma, falls from a significant height, or penetrating trauma?
What are the four different mechanisms of injury in explosions?	The four mechanisms of injury from this are: 1) Primary blast injuries (due entirely to the blast pressure wave itself; hollow organs are the most suseptible) 2) Secondary blast injuries (flying debris injuries) 3) Tertiary blast injuries (ground shock from impact) 4) Miscellaneous blast injuries.
The four mechanisms of injury from this are: 1) Primary blast injuries (due entirely to the blast pressure wave itself; hollow organs are the most suseptible) 2) Secondary blast injuries (flying debris injuries) 3) Tertiary blast injuries (ground shock from impact) 4) Miscellaneous blast injuries.	What are the four different mechanisms of injury in explosions?
How fast can shrapnel and debris from explosives travel?	These can travel up to nearly 3,000 mph for conventional military explosives.
These can travel up to nearly 3,000 mph for conventional military explosives.	How fast can shrapnel and debris from explosives travel?
What organ system is most sensitive to blast injuries?	The ear is the organ system most sensitive to this.
The ear is the organ system most sensitive to this.	What organ system is most sensitive to blast injuries?
What happens to the tympanic membrane when hit by a pressure wave?	This has evolved to detect minor chasnges in pressure and will rupture at pressures of 5 to 7 pounds per square inch above atmosphere pressure.
This has evolved to detect minor chasnges in pressure and will rupture at pressures of 5 to 7 pounds per square inch above atmosphere pressure.	What happens to the tympanic membrane when hit by a pressure wave?
What are pulmonary blast injuries?	These are defined as pulmonary trauma (consisting of contusions and hemorrhages) that results from short-range exposure to the detonation of explosives.
These are defined as pulmonary trauma (consisting of contusions and hemorrhages) that results from short-range exposure to the detonation of explosives.	What are pulmonary blast injuries?
What should you avoid with victims of blast injuries with suspected lung injury?	With these patients, avoid giving oxygen under positive pressure (that is by demand valve), because that may simply increase the damage to the lungs.
With these patients, avoid giving oxygen under positive pressure (that is by demand valve), because that may simply increase the damage to the lungs.	What should you avoid with victims of blast injuries with suspected lung injury?
What is an arterial air embolism?	This is one of the most concerning pulmonary blast injuries, and occurs on alveolar disruption with subsequent air embolization into the pulmonary vasculature. This can produce disturbances in vision, changes in behavior, changes in state of consciousness, and a variety of other neurologic signs.
This is one of the most concerning pulmonary blast injuries, and occurs on alveolar disruption with subsequent air embolization into the pulmonary vasculature. This can produce disturbances in vision, changes in behavior, changes in state of consciousness, and a variety of other neurologic signs.	What is an arterial air embolism?
What are petechiae?	These are pinpoint hemorrhages that show up on the skin, and are the dominant form of pathology for hollow organs injured by blast pressure waves.
These are pinpoint hemorrhages that show up on the skin, and are the dominant form of pathology for hollow organs injured by blast pressure waves.	What are petechiae?
What are the most common causes of death from blast injuries?	Neurologic injuries and head trauma are the most common causes of death from this.
Neurologic injuries and head trauma are the most common causes of death from this.	What are the most common causes of death from blast injuries?
What can trigger instant but transient unconsciousness, with or without retrograde amnesia?	This can be triggered not only by head trauma, but also by cardiovascular problems.
This can be triggered not only by head trauma, but also by cardiovascular problems.	What can trigger instant but transient unconsciousness, with or without retrograde amnesia?
What is something to remember about body armor in blast injury treatment?	"This may limit or prevent shrapnel from entering the body, but it also ""catches"" more energy from the blast wave, possibly resulting in the victim being thrown backward, thus increasing the potential for spine and spinal cord injury."
"This may limit or prevent shrapnel from entering the body, but it also ""catches"" more energy from the blast wave, possibly resulting in the victim being thrown backward, thus increasing the potential for spine and spinal cord injury."	What is something to remember about body armor in blast injury treatment?
What is multisystem trauma?	This is a term that describes a preson who has been subjected to multiple traumatic injuries involving more than one body system.
This is a term that describes a preson who has been subjected to multiple traumatic injuries involving more than one body system.	What is multisystem trauma?
What kind of care do most patients with multisystem trauma require?	"With these patients, definitive care requires surgical intervention; therefore, on-scene time should be limited to 10 minutes or less; this is referred to as the ""platinum 10 minutes""."
"With these patients, definitive care requires surgical intervention; therefore, on-scene time should be limited to 10 minutes or less; this is referred to as the ""platinum 10 minutes""."	What kind of care do most patients with multisystem trauma require?
What can a crushing injury to the upper part of the neck cause?	This injury can cause the cartilages of the upper airway and larynx to fracture. The can lead to the leakage of air into the soft tissue of the neck.
This injury can cause the cartilages of the upper airway and larynx to fracture. The can lead to the leakage of air into the soft tissue of the neck.	What can a crushing injury to the upper part of the neck cause?
What is subcutaneous crepitation?	This is when air is trapped in subcutaneous tissue.
This is when air is trapped in subcutaneous tissue.	What is subcutaneous crepitation?
What is the appropriate use of emergency air medical services for trauma patients?	This medical service is appropriate for the following situations: 1) There is an extended period required to access or extricate a remote or trapped patient. 2) The distance to the trauma center is greater than 20 to 25 miles 3) The patient needs medical care and stabilizatio at the ALS level, and there is no ALS-level ground ambulance service available within a reasonable time frame. 4) Traffice conditions or hospital availability make it unlikely that the patient will get to a trauma center. 5) There are multiple patients who will overwhelm resources at the trauma center reachable by ground. 6) EMS systems require bringing a patient to the nearest hospital for initial evaluation and stabilization. 7) There is a mass-casualty incident.
This medical service is appropriate for the following situations: 1) There is an extended period required to access or extricate a remote or trapped patient. 2) The distance to the trauma center is greater than 20 to 25 miles 3) The patient needs medical care and stabilizatio at the ALS level, and there is no ALS-level ground ambulance service available within a reasonable time frame. 4) Traffice conditions or hospital availability make it unlikely that the patient will get to a trauma center. 5) There are multiple patients who will overwhelm resources at the trauma center reachable by ground. 6) EMS systems require bringing a patient to the nearest hospital for initial evaluation and stabilization. 7) There is a mass-casualty incident.	What is the appropriate use of emergency air medical services for trauma patients?
What key elements are in a Level I trauma center?	Key elements of this are: 1) 24 hour in-house coverage by general surgeons 2) Availability of care in specialties such as orthopaedic surgery, neurosurgery, anesthesiology, emergency medicine, radiology, internal medicine, and critical care 3) Should also include cardiac, hand, pediatric, and microvascular surgery and hemodialysis. 4) Provides leadership in prevention, public education, and continuing education of trauma team members. 5) Committed to continued improvement through a comprehensive quality assessment program and organized research to help direct new innovations in trauma care.
Key elements of this are: 1) 24 hour in-house coverage by general surgeons 2) Availability of care in specialties such as orthopaedic surgery, neurosurgery, anesthesiology, emergency medicine, radiology, internal medicine, and critical care 3) Should also include cardiac, hand, pediatric, and microvascular surgery and hemodialysis. 4) Provides leadership in prevention, public education, and continuing education of trauma team members. 5) Committed to continued improvement through a comprehensive quality assessment program and organized research to help direct new innovations in trauma care.	What key elements are in a Level I trauma center?
What key elements are in a Level II trauma center?	Key elements of this are: 1) 24 hour in-house coverage by general surgeons 2) Availability of care in specialties such as orthopaedic surgery, neurosurgery, anesthesiology, emergency medicine, radiology, internal medicine, and critical care 3) Committed to trauma prevention and continuing education of trauma team members. 4) Provides continued improvement in trauma care through a comprehensive quality assessment program.
Key elements of this are: 1) 24 hour in-house coverage by general surgeons 2) Availability of care in specialties such as orthopaedic surgery, neurosurgery, anesthesiology, emergency medicine, radiology, internal medicine, and critical care 3) Committed to trauma prevention and continuing education of trauma team members. 4) Provides continued improvement in trauma care through a comprehensive quality assessment program.	What key elements are in a Level II trauma center?
What key elements are in a Level III trauma center?	Key elements of this are: 1) 24 hour in-house coverage by general surgeons 2) Committed to continued improvement through a comprehensive quality assessment program 3) Has developed transfer agreements for patients requiring more comprehensive care at a Level I or Level iI trauma center. 4) Committed to continuing education of nursing and allied health personnel or the trauma team. 5) Must be involved with prevention and have an active outreach program for its referring communities.
Key elements of this are: 1) 24 hour in-house coverage by general surgeons 2) Committed to continued improvement through a comprehensive quality assessment program 3) Has developed transfer agreements for patients requiring more comprehensive care at a Level I or Level iI trauma center. 4) Committed to continuing education of nursing and allied health personnel or the trauma team. 5) Must be involved with prevention and have an active outreach program for its referring communities.	What key elements are in a Level III trauma center?
What key elements are in a Level IV trauma center?	Key elements of this are: 1) Include basic emergency department facilities to implement ATLS protocols and 24-hour laboratory coverage. 2) Transfer to higher level trauma centers follows the guidelines outlined in formal transfer agreements. 3) Committed to continued improvement of these trauma care activities through a formal quality assessment program. 4) Involved in prevention, outreach, and education within its community.
Key elements of this are: 1) Include basic emergency department facilities to implement ATLS protocols and 24-hour laboratory coverage. 2) Transfer to higher level trauma centers follows the guidelines outlined in formal transfer agreements. 3) Committed to continued improvement of these trauma care activities through a formal quality assessment program. 4) Involved in prevention, outreach, and education within its community.	What key elements are in a Level IV trauma center?
What is a trauma score?	This is a way to calcualte a number from 1 to 16, that accurately evaluates the extent of trauma in a patient.
This is a way to calcualte a number from 1 to 16, that accurately evaluates the extent of trauma in a patient.	What is a trauma score?
In the Glasgow Coma Scale, how do you rate eye opening?	For this evaluation: 4 - Spontaneous 3 - To Voice 2 - To Pain 1 - None
For this evaluation: 4 - Spontaneous 3 - To Voice 2 - To Pain 1 - None	In the Glasgow Coma Scale, how do you rate eye opening?
In the Glasgow Coma Scale, how do you rate verbal response?	For this evaluation: 5 - Oriented 4 - Confused 3 - Inappropriate Words 2 - Incomprehensible Words 1 - None
For this evaluation: 5 - Oriented 4 - Confused 3 - Inappropriate Words 2 - Incomprehensible Words 1 - None	In the Glasgow Coma Scale, how do you rate verbal response?
In the Glasgow Coma Scale, how do you rate motor response?	For this evaluation: 6 - Obeys Commands 5 - Localizes Pain 4 - Withdraws (pain) 3 - Flexion (pain) 2 - Extension (pain) 1 - None
For this evaluation: 6 - Obeys Commands 5 - Localizes Pain 4 - Withdraws (pain) 3 - Flexion (pain) 2 - Extension (pain) 1 - None	In the Glasgow Coma Scale, how do you rate motor response?
What is the American College of Surgeons' Criteria for a Level I Patient?	Criteria for this are: 1) Confirmed blood pressure of less than 90 mg Hg at any time in adults, and age-specific hypotension in children. 2) Respiratory compromise, obstruction, and/or intubation 3) Receiving blood to maintain vital signs 4) Emergency physician's discretion 5) Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score of less than or equal to 8 with mechanism attributed to trauma 6) Gunshot wound to the abdomen, neck, or chest.
Criteria for this are: 1) Confirmed blood pressure of less than 90 mg Hg at any time in adults, and age-specific hypotension in children. 2) Respiratory compromise, obstruction, and/or intubation 3) Receiving blood to maintain vital signs 4) Emergency physician's discretion 5) Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score of less than or equal to 8 with mechanism attributed to trauma 6) Gunshot wound to the abdomen, neck, or chest.	What is the American College of Surgeons' Criteria for a Level I Patient?
What are the primary female reproductive organs?	These are the ovaries.
These are the ovaries.	What are the primary female reproductive organs?
How many ovum are produced each month?	Each ovary produces an ovum in alternating months and releases it into the fallopian tube.
Each ovary produces an ovum in alternating months and releases it into the fallopian tube.	How many ovum are produced each month?
What is the term for when the ovum is released?	This is called ovulation.
This is called ovulation.	What is the term for when the ovum is released?
What are the fallopian tubes?	These connect each ovary with the uterus and are the primary location for fertilization of the ovum.
These connect each ovary with the uterus and are the primary location for fertilization of the ovum.	What are the fallopian tubes?
What is the uterus?	This is the muscular organ where the fetus grows during pregnancy.
This is the muscular organ where the fetus grows during pregnancy.	What is the uterus?
What is the cervix?	This is the narrowest and lowest portion of the uterus, and opens into the vagina.
This is the narrowest and lowest portion of the uterus, and opens into the vagina.	What is the cervix?
What is the vagina?	This is the outermost cavity of a woman's reproductive system and forms the lower part of the birth canal. It is about 8 to 12 cm in length.
This is the outermost cavity of a woman's reproductive system and forms the lower part of the birth canal. It is about 8 to 12 cm in length.	What is the vagina?
What are the labia majora and labia minora?	These are folds of tissue that surround the urethral and vaginal openings.
These are folds of tissue that surround the urethral and vaginal openings.	What are the labia majora and labia minora?
What is the perineum?	This is the area of skin between the vagina and the anus.
This is the area of skin between the vagina and the anus.	What is the perineum?
What is pelvic inflammatory disease (PID)?	This is an infection of the female upper organs of reproduction (uterus, ovaries, and fallopian tubes) that occurs almost exclusively in sexually active women.
This is an infection of the female upper organs of reproduction (uterus, ovaries, and fallopian tubes) that occurs almost exclusively in sexually active women.	What is pelvic inflammatory disease (PID)?
What is an ectopic pregnancy?	This is a pregnancy that develops outside the uterus, most often in the fallopian tubes.
This is a pregnancy that develops outside the uterus, most often in the fallopian tubes.	What is an ectopic pregnancy?
What are the common presenting signs of PID?	Common signs of this include: Lower abdominal pain Abnormal and foul-smelling vaginal discharge Increased pain with intercourse Fever General Malaise Nausea and vomiting
Common signs of this include: Lower abdominal pain Abnormal and foul-smelling vaginal discharge Increased pain with intercourse Fever General Malaise Nausea and vomiting	What are the common presenting signs of PID?
What is chlamydia?	This is a common sexually transmitted disease, affecting an estimated 2.8 million Americans each year. Symptoms include lower abdominal pain, low back pain, nausea, fever, pain during intercourse, and/or bleeding between menstrual periods.
This is a common sexually transmitted disease, affecting an estimated 2.8 million Americans each year. Symptoms include lower abdominal pain, low back pain, nausea, fever, pain during intercourse, and/or bleeding between menstrual periods.	What is chlamydia?
What is bacterial vaginosis?	This is one of the most common conditions to afflict women. Symptoms may include itching, burning, or pain.
This is one of the most common conditions to afflict women. Symptoms may include itching, burning, or pain.	What is bacterial vaginosis?
What is gonorrhea?	This is caused by Neisseria gonorrhoeae. Symptoms, which are generally more severe in men than in women, appear in approximately 2 to 10 days after exposure, and include painful urination, burning or itching, yellowish or bloody discharge, and blood associated with vaginal intercourse.
This is caused by Neisseria gonorrhoeae. Symptoms, which are generally more severe in men than in women, appear in approximately 2 to 10 days after exposure, and include painful urination, burning or itching, yellowish or bloody discharge, and blood associated with vaginal intercourse.	What is gonorrhea?
What should you determine if a female patient has vaginal bleeding?	If she has this, determine how many pads she is using per hour.
If she has this, determine how many pads she is using per hour.	What should you determine if a female patient has vaginal bleeding?
How should you intervene if the patient has vaginal bleeding?	In this situation, the patient should be treated for hypoperfusion or shock. Keep her warm, place her in a supine position with her legs elevated, and provide her with supplemental oxygen even if she is not experiencing difficulty breathing, then promptly transport.
In this situation, the patient should be treated for hypoperfusion or shock. Keep her warm, place her in a supine position with her legs elevated, and provide her with supplemental oxygen even if she is not experiencing difficulty breathing, then promptly transport.	How should you intervene if the patient has vaginal bleeding?
What should you remember about external genital injuries?	These have a rich nerve supply, making injuries very painful. Treat any external lacerations, abrasions, and tears with moist, sterile compresses, using local pressure to control bleeding and a diaper-type bandage to hold the dressings in place.
These have a rich nerve supply, making injuries very painful. Treat any external lacerations, abrasions, and tears with moist, sterile compresses, using local pressure to control bleeding and a diaper-type bandage to hold the dressings in place.	What should you remember about external genital injuries?
What kind of pain will a patient with PID complain about?	"A patient with this kind of PID will complain of abdominal pain. The pain generally starets during or after normal menstruation. The pain may be described as ""achy"" and may be made worse by walking. Other symptoms may include vaginal discharge, fever and chills, and pain or burning on urination."
"A patient with this kind of PID will complain of abdominal pain. The pain generally starets during or after normal menstruation. The pain may be described as ""achy"" and may be made worse by walking. Other symptoms may include vaginal discharge, fever and chills, and pain or burning on urination."	What kind of pain will a patient with PID complain about?
What percentage of women are raped in the US?	One in three are raped in their lifetimes.
One in three are raped in their lifetimes.	What percentage of women are raped in the US?
What percentage of women will be sexually molested in their lifetimes?	One in every four will be sexually molested, often before the age of 12.
One in every four will be sexually molested, often before the age of 12.	What percentage of women will be sexually molested in their lifetimes?
What special treatment principles should be applied to patients who have been sexually assaulted?	In addition to the usual treatment principles, in this situation you should also: 1). Document the patient's history, assessment, treatment, and response to treatment in detail because you may have to appear in court as long as 2 or 3 years later. Do not speculate. Record only the facts. 2) Make airway maintenance a major priority. 3) Complete the SAMPLE history objectively. 4) Follow any crime scene policy established by your system to protect the scene and any potential evidence for police, particularly that for evidence collection. If the patient will tolerate being wrapped in a sterile burn sheet, this may help investigators to find any hair, fluid, or fiber from the alleged offender. 5) Do not examine the genitalia unless there is major bleeding. If an object has been inserted into the vagina or rectum, do not attempt to remove it. 6) To reduce the patient's anxiety, make sure the EMT is the same sex as the patient, whenever possible. 7) Discourage the patient from bathing, voiding, or cleaning any wounds until the hospital staff has completed an assessment. Handle the patient's clothes as little as possible, placing articles and any other evidence in paper bags. If the patient insists on urinating, ask the patient to do so in a sterile urine container (if available). Also, deposit the toilet paper in a paper bag. Seal and mark the bag for the police. This can be critical evidence.
In addition to the usual treatment principles, in this situation you should also: 1). Document the patient's history, assessment, treatment, and response to treatment in detail because you may have to appear in court as long as 2 or 3 years later. Do not speculate. Record only the facts. 2) Make airway maintenance a major priority. 3) Complete the SAMPLE history objectively. 4) Follow any crime scene policy established by your system to protect the scene and any potential evidence for police, particularly that for evidence collection. If the patient will tolerate being wrapped in a sterile burn sheet, this may help investigators to find any hair, fluid, or fiber from the alleged offender. 5) Do not examine the genitalia unless there is major bleeding. If an object has been inserted into the vagina or rectum, do not attempt to remove it. 6) To reduce the patient's anxiety, make sure the EMT is the same sex as the patient, whenever possible. 7) Discourage the patient from bathing, voiding, or cleaning any wounds until the hospital staff has completed an assessment. Handle the patient's clothes as little as possible, placing articles and any other evidence in paper bags. If the patient insists on urinating, ask the patient to do so in a sterile urine container (if available). Also, deposit the toilet paper in a paper bag. Seal and mark the bag for the police. This can be critical evidence.	What special treatment principles should be applied to patients who have been sexually assaulted?
What can cause a psychological or behavioral crisis?	These can be the result of the emergency situation, mental illness, mind-alternating substances, stress, or many other causes.
These can be the result of the emergency situation, mental illness, mind-alternating substances, stress, or many other causes.	What can cause a psychological or behavioral crisis?
What is the code for a psychiatric emergency?	This is referred to as a section 12.
This is referred to as a section 12.	What is the code for a psychiatric emergency?
What is behavior?	This is what you can see of a person's response to the environment: his or her actions.
This is what you can see of a person's response to the environment: his or her actions.	What is behavior?
What is a behavioral crisis?	This is any reaction to events that interferes with the activities of daily living or has become unacceptable to the patient, family, or community.
This is any reaction to events that interferes with the activities of daily living or has become unacceptable to the patient, family, or community.	What is a behavioral crisis?
How long a period does an abnormal or disturbing pattern last before it is regarded as a matter of concern from a mental health standpoint?	This is regarded as a matter of concern from a mental health standpoint if it lasts for at least a month.
This is regarded as a matter of concern from a mental health standpoint if it lasts for at least a month.	How long a period does an abnormal or disturbing pattern last before it is regarded as a matter of concern from a mental health standpoint?
What is chronic depression?	This is a persistent feeling of sadness and despair, and may be a symptom of a mental or physical disorder.
This is a persistent feeling of sadness and despair, and may be a symptom of a mental or physical disorder.	What is chronic depression?
What is a psychiatric emergency?	This is an emergency in which abnormal behavior threatens a person's own health and safety or the health and safety of another person, for example when a person becomes suicidal, homicidal, or has a psychotic episode.
This is an emergency in which abnormal behavior threatens a person's own health and safety or the health and safety of another person, for example when a person becomes suicidal, homicidal, or has a psychotic episode.	What is a psychiatric emergency?
What is a psychiatric disorder?	This is an illness with psychological or behavioral symptoms that may result in impaired functioning.
This is an illness with psychological or behavioral symptoms that may result in impaired functioning.	What is a psychiatric disorder?
According to the National Institute of Mental Health, however many Americans have some type of psychiatric disorder?	According to this institute, one in five Americans has some type of psychaitric disorder.
According to this institute, one in five Americans has some type of psychaitric disorder.	According to the National Institute of Mental Health, however many Americans have some type of psychiatric disorder?
What are some underlying causes of psychiatric disorders?	Some underlying causes of this include: social and situational stress such as divorce or death of a loved one, psychiatric diseases such as schizophrenia, physical illnesses such as diabetic emergencies, chemical problems such as alcohol or drug use, or biologic disturbances such as electrolyte imbalances.
Some underlying causes of this include: social and situational stress such as divorce or death of a loved one, psychiatric diseases such as schizophrenia, physical illnesses such as diabetic emergencies, chemical problems such as alcohol or drug use, or biologic disturbances such as electrolyte imbalances.	What are some underlying causes of psychiatric disorders?
What are the two basic categories of diagnosis that a physician will use for a behavioral crisis or psychiatric emergency?	A physician will diagnosis these as either organic (physical) or functional (psychological).
A physician will diagnosis these as either organic (physical) or functional (psychological).	What are the two basic categories of diagnosis that a physician will use for a behavioral crisis or psychiatric emergency?
What is organic brain syndrome?	This is a temporary or permanent dysfunction of the brain caused by a disturbance in the physical or physiologic functioning of the brain tissue.
This is a temporary or permanent dysfunction of the brain caused by a disturbance in the physical or physiologic functioning of the brain tissue.	What is organic brain syndrome?
What are some causes of organic brain syndrome?	Some causes of this include: sudden illness recent trauma to the head seizure disorders drug and alcohol intoxication, overdose, or withdrawal and diseases of the brain, such as Alzheimer disease and meningitis.
Some causes of this include: sudden illness recent trauma to the head seizure disorders drug and alcohol intoxication, overdose, or withdrawal and diseases of the brain, such as Alzheimer disease and meningitis.	What are some causes of organic brain syndrome?
What is altered mental status?	This can arise from a low level of blood glucose, lack of oxygen, inadequate blood flow to the brain, and excessive heat or cold.
This can arise from a low level of blood glucose, lack of oxygen, inadequate blood flow to the brain, and excessive heat or cold.	What is altered mental status?
What is a functional disorder?	This is one in which the abnormal operation of an organ cannot be traced to an obvious change in the actual structure or physiology of the organ or organ system.
This is one in which the abnormal operation of an organ cannot be traced to an obvious change in the actual structure or physiology of the organ or organ system.	What is a functional disorder?
What are some examples of psychiatric disorders?	Some examples of this include schizophrenia, anxiety conditions, and depression.
Some examples of this include schizophrenia, anxiety conditions, and depression.	What are some examples of psychiatric disorders?
What are some safety guidelines for a behavioral crisis or a psychiatric emergency?	Safety guidelines for these include: 1) Be prepared to spend extra time 2) Have a definite plan of action 3) Identify yourself calmly 4) Be direct 5) Assess the scene 6) Stay with the patient 7) Encourage purposeful movement (getting dressed, packing for the hospital, etc.) 8) Express interest in the patient's story 9) Do not get too close to the patient 10) Avoid fighting with the patient 11) Be honest and reassuring 12) Do not judge
Safety guidelines for these include: 1) Be prepared to spend extra time 2) Have a definite plan of action 3) Identify yourself calmly 4) Be direct 5) Assess the scene 6) Stay with the patient 7) Encourage purposeful movement (getting dressed, packing for the hospital, etc.) 8) Express interest in the patient's story 9) Do not get too close to the patient 10) Avoid fighting with the patient 11) Be honest and reassuring 12) Do not judge	What are some safety guidelines for a behavioral crisis or a psychiatric emergency?
When trying to determine the reason for the patient's behavioral state, what 3 major areas should be considered as possible contributors?	3 major areas to consider as possible contributors to this should be: 1) Is the patient's central nervous system functioning properly? 2) Are hallucinogens or other drugs or alcohol a factor? 3) Are psychogenic circumstances, symptoms, or illness (caused by mental rather than physical factors) involved?
3 major areas to consider as possible contributors to this should be: 1) Is the patient's central nervous system functioning properly? 2) Are hallucinogens or other drugs or alcohol a factor? 3) Are psychogenic circumstances, symptoms, or illness (caused by mental rather than physical factors) involved?	When trying to determine the reason for the patient's behavioral state, what 3 major areas should be considered as possible contributors?
In geriatric patients, what should you consider as a possible cause of abnormal behavior?	With these patients, you should consider Alzheimer disease as a possible cause of abnormal behavior.
With these patients, you should consider Alzheimer disease as a possible cause of abnormal behavior.	In geriatric patients, what should you consider as a possible cause of abnormal behavior?
When dealing with psychiatric emergencies, what two primary goals does the SAMPLE assessment have?	This has two primary goals: recognizing major threats to life and reducing the stress of the situation as much as possible.
This has two primary goals: recognizing major threats to life and reducing the stress of the situation as much as possible.	When dealing with psychiatric emergencies, what two primary goals does the SAMPLE assessment have?
When assessing a patient in a psychiatric emergency or behavioral crisis, what can be very useful?	In this situation, it can be very useful to gather information separately from a relative or caregiver.
In this situation, it can be very useful to gather information separately from a relative or caregiver.	When assessing a patient in a psychiatric emergency or behavioral crisis, what can be very useful?
What is psychosis?	This is a state of delusion in which the person is out of touch with reality.
This is a state of delusion in which the person is out of touch with reality.	What is psychosis?
What are some of reasons psychotic episodes occur?	These occur due to: The use of mind-altering substances Intense stress Delusional disorders Schizophrenia
These occur due to: The use of mind-altering substances Intense stress Delusional disorders Schizophrenia	What are some of reasons psychotic episodes occur?
What are some symptoms of schizophrenia?	Some symptoms of this include delusions, hallucinations, a lack of interest in pleasure, and erratic speech.
Some symptoms of this include delusions, hallucinations, a lack of interest in pleasure, and erratic speech.	What are some symptoms of schizophrenia?
What guidelines should you follow when dealing with a psychotic patient?	When dealing with these patients, you should Determine if the situation is a danger to yourself or others Identify yourself clearly Be calm, direct, and straightforward Maintain an emotional distance. Do not touch the patient, and do not be overly friendly or effusively reassuring. Do not argue. Explain what you would like to do. Involve people the patient trusts, such as family or friends, to gain patient cooperation.
When dealing with these patients, you should Determine if the situation is a danger to yourself or others Identify yourself clearly Be calm, direct, and straightforward Maintain an emotional distance. Do not touch the patient, and do not be overly friendly or effusively reassuring. Do not argue. Explain what you would like to do. Involve people the patient trusts, such as family or friends, to gain patient cooperation.	What guidelines should you follow when dealing with a psychotic patient?
When the patient has risk factors associated with suicide, what warning signs should you be alert to?	When dealing with these patients, be alert for the following warning signs: Does the patient have an air of tearfulness, sadness, deep despair, or hopelessness? Does the patient avoid eye contact, speak slowly or haltingly, and give off a sense of vacancy? Does the patient seem unable to talk about the future? Is there any suggestion of suicide? And, Does the patient have any specific plans relating to death?
When dealing with these patients, be alert for the following warning signs: Does the patient have an air of tearfulness, sadness, deep despair, or hopelessness? Does the patient avoid eye contact, speak slowly or haltingly, and give off a sense of vacancy? Does the patient seem unable to talk about the future? Is there any suggestion of suicide? And, Does the patient have any specific plans relating to death?	When the patient has risk factors associated with suicide, what warning signs should you be alert to?
What percentage of successful suicides are preceded by at least one attempt?	About 80% of these were preceded by at least one attempt.
About 80% of these were preceded by at least one attempt.	What percentage of successful suicides are preceded by at least one attempt?
What group is particularly at risk of suicide?	Men who are older than 55 and are single, widowed, divorced, alcoholic, or depressed, have an especially high risk and are very often successful if they make an attempt.
Men who are older than 55 and are single, widowed, divorced, alcoholic, or depressed, have an especially high risk and are very often successful if they make an attempt.	What group is particularly at risk of suicide?
What is agitated delirium?	This is a condition of impairment in cognitive function that can present with disorientation, hallucinations, or delusions combined with restlessness or irregular physical activity.
This is a condition of impairment in cognitive function that can present with disorientation, hallucinations, or delusions combined with restlessness or irregular physical activity.	What is agitated delirium?
What are some common physical symptoms of agitated delirium?	Common physical symptoms include hypertension, tachycardia, diaphoresis, and dilated pupils.
Common physical symptoms include hypertension, tachycardia, diaphoresis, and dilated pupils.	What are some common physical symptoms of agitated delirium?
What does a section 35 code mean?	This is code for an under-the-influence situation.
This is code for an under-the-influence situation.	What does a section 35 code mean?
Should you err on the side of treatment or refusal when dealing with patients who deny treatment?	In this situation, err on the side of treatment and transport. It is far easier to defend yourself against charges of battery than it is to justify abandonment.
In this situation, err on the side of treatment and transport. It is far easier to defend yourself against charges of battery than it is to justify abandonment.	Should you err on the side of treatment or refusal when dealing with patients who deny treatment?
What should you ALWAYS do before restraining a patient?	Before doing this, you should ALWAYS consult medical control and contact law enforcement.
Before doing this, you should ALWAYS consult medical control and contact law enforcement.	What should you ALWAYS do before restraining a patient?
How many people should be present to carry out the restraint?	At least four people should be present.
At least four people should be present.	How many people should be present to carry out the restraint?
What percentage of violent attacks does depression account for?	This accounts for 20% of violent attacks.
This accounts for 20% of violent attacks.	What percentage of violent attacks does depression account for?
What is a seizure?	This is a temproary alteration in consciousness.
This is a temproary alteration in consciousness.	What is a seizure?
What are the different types of seizures?	The different types of this can be classified as generalized, partial, and status epilepticus.
The different types of this can be classified as generalized, partial, and status epilepticus.	What are the different types of seizures?
What is a generalized seizure?	This is typically charactrerized by unconsciousness and severe twitching of all the body's muscles that last several minutes or longer. It results from abnormal discharges from large areas of the brain, usually involving both hemispheres. It was formally called a grand mal seizure.
This is typically charactrerized by unconsciousness and severe twitching of all the body's muscles that last several minutes or longer. It results from abnormal discharges from large areas of the brain, usually involving both hemispheres. It was formally called a grand mal seizure.	What is a generalized seizure?
What is an absence seizure?	This type does not involve any changes in motor activity and is instead a brief lapse of consciousness in which the patient seems to stare and not to respond to anyone. It is also called a petit mal.
This type does not involve any changes in motor activity and is instead a brief lapse of consciousness in which the patient seems to stare and not to respond to anyone. It is also called a petit mal.	What is an absence seizure?
What organs make up the female reproductive system?	This is made up of the ovaries, the fallopian tubes, uterus, cervix, vagina, and the mammary glands.
This is made up of the ovaries, the fallopian tubes, uterus, cervix, vagina, and the mammary glands.	What organs make up the female reproductive system?
What is inside each ovary?	Inside each are thousands of follicles, and each follice contains an egg.
Inside each are thousands of follicles, and each follice contains an egg.	What is inside each ovary?
What percentage of their eggs are females born with?	Females are born with all of these that they will release in their lifetime.
Females are born with all of these that they will release in their lifetime.	What percentage of their eggs are females born with?
During each menstrual cycle, how many follicles will be successful at maturing and releasing an egg?	During each one of these, there will only be one follicle (out of 10 to 20 that attempt the process each month).
During each one of these, there will only be one follicle (out of 10 to 20 that attempt the process each month).	During each menstrual cycle, how many follicles will be successful at maturing and releasing an egg?
When does ovulation occur?	This occurs approximately 2 weeks prior to menstruation.
This occurs approximately 2 weeks prior to menstruation.	When does ovulation occur?
What is endometrium?	This is the lining of the inside of the uterus, and begins to thicken during ovulation.
This is the lining of the inside of the uterus, and begins to thicken during ovulation.	What is endometrium?
How long after being released from the follicle will the egg die if not fertilized?	This will die 36 to 48 hours after being released.
This will die 36 to 48 hours after being released.	How long after being released from the follicle will the egg die if not fertilized?
When does the shedding of the uterine walls occur (a period)?	This occurs around the 28th day of a women's cycle.
This occurs around the 28th day of a women's cycle.	When does the shedding of the uterine walls occur (a period)?
What is an embryo?	This is a fertilized egg in the early stages.
This is a fertilized egg in the early stages.	What is an embryo?
What is a fetus?	This is the developing, unborn infant.
This is the developing, unborn infant.	What is a fetus?
What is the birth canal?	This is made up of the vagina and the lower third, or neck, of the uterus (cervix).
This is made up of the vagina and the lower third, or neck, of the uterus (cervix).	What is the birth canal?
What prevents foreign contaminants from entering the uterus during pregnancy?	During pregnancy, the cervix contains a mucous plug that seals the uterine opening, preventing this.
During pregnancy, the cervix contains a mucous plug that seals the uterine opening, preventing this.	What prevents foreign contaminants from entering the uterus during pregnancy?
What is the bloodly show?	This is when the cervix dilates, causing the plug to discharge into the vagina as pink-tinged mucus.
This is when the cervix dilates, causing the plug to discharge into the vagina as pink-tinged mucus.	What is the bloodly show?
What is an episiotomy?	This is an incision to the perineum to prevent the tissue from tearing or ripping.
This is an incision to the perineum to prevent the tissue from tearing or ripping.	What is an episiotomy?
What are the mammary glands?	These produce milk that is carried through ducts to the nipples to provide nourishment to the infant. Signs of pregnancy in these include increased size and tenderness.
These produce milk that is carried through ducts to the nipples to provide nourishment to the infant. Signs of pregnancy in these include increased size and tenderness.	What are the mammary glands?
What is the placenta?	This is a disk-shaped structure, attached to the inner lining of the wall of uterus and is connected to the fetus by the umbilical cord.
This is a disk-shaped structure, attached to the inner lining of the wall of uterus and is connected to the fetus by the umbilical cord.	What is the placenta?
What is the placental barrier?	This consists of two layers of cells, keeping circulation of the women and fetus separated but allowing nutrients, oxygen, waste, carbon dioxide, and many toxins and most medications to pass between the fetus and women.
This consists of two layers of cells, keeping circulation of the women and fetus separated but allowing nutrients, oxygen, waste, carbon dioxide, and many toxins and most medications to pass between the fetus and women.	What is the placental barrier?
What is the umbilical cord?	This is the lifeline of the fetus, connecting the woman and fetus through the placenta. It contains two arteries and one vein.
This is the lifeline of the fetus, connecting the woman and fetus through the placenta. It contains two arteries and one vein.	What is the umbilical cord?
What does the umbilical vein do?	This carries oxygenated blood from the woman to the heart of the fetus.
This carries oxygenated blood from the woman to the heart of the fetus.	What does the umbilical vein do?
What do the umbilical arteries do?	These carry deoxygenated blood from the heart of the fetus to the woman.
These carry deoxygenated blood from the heart of the fetus to the woman.	What do the umbilical arteries do?
What is the amniotic sac?	This is a fluid-filled, baglike membrane in which the fetus develops. Is contains about 500 to 1,000 mL of fluid, which helps insulate and protect the floating fetus.
This is a fluid-filled, baglike membrane in which the fetus develops. Is contains about 500 to 1,000 mL of fluid, which helps insulate and protect the floating fetus.	What is the amniotic sac?
"When a woman's ""water breaks"", what is happening?"	When this happens, the amniotic sac is rupturing, and the amniotic fluid is released, removing bacteria and lubricating the birth canal. This usually signals the beginning of labor.
When this happens, the amniotic sac is rupturing, and the amniotic fluid is released, removing bacteria and lubricating the birth canal. This usually signals the beginning of labor.	"When a woman's ""water breaks"", what is happening?"
How many babies are actually born on their due date?	Fewer than half of babies are actually born on this day.
Fewer than half of babies are actually born on this day.	How many babies are actually born on their due date?
What do most medical models base the due date on?	Most medical models base this on the first day of the last menstrual cycle. This adds approximately 2 weeks to the actual pregnancy because conception occured sometime after ovulation.
Most medical models base this on the first day of the last menstrual cycle. This adds approximately 2 weeks to the actual pregnancy because conception occured sometime after ovulation.	What do most medical models base the due date on?
What systems normally undergo changes during pregnancy?	The primary systems involved with this are the respiratory, cardiovascular, and musculoskeletal systems.
The primary systems involved with this are the respiratory, cardiovascular, and musculoskeletal systems.	What systems normally undergo changes during pregnancy?
What does the reproductive system do during pregnancy?	In this system, hormone levels increase to support fetal development and prepare the body for childbirth. These increased hormone levels put pregnant patients at an increased risk for complications from trauma, bleeding, and some medical conditions.
In this system, hormone levels increase to support fetal development and prepare the body for childbirth. These increased hormone levels put pregnant patients at an increased risk for complications from trauma, bleeding, and some medical conditions.	What does the reproductive system do during pregnancy?
Where is the uterus by the 20th week of pregnancy?	By this time, the uterus is at or above the belly button.
By this time, the uterus is at or above the belly button.	Where is the uterus by the 20th week of pregnancy?
What effects does the enlarged uterus have on the respiratory and cardiovascular systems?	During pregnancy, this has a direct effect on these systems because its enlarged size results in organs being shifted from their normal positions and an overall decreased area for all of the organs to fit.
During pregnancy, this has a direct effect on these systems because its enlarged size results in organs being shifted from their normal positions and an overall decreased area for all of the organs to fit.	What effects does the enlarged uterus have on the respiratory and cardiovascular systems?
When does rapid uterine growth occur?	This occurs in the second trimester of pregnancy.
This occurs in the second trimester of pregnancy.	When does rapid uterine growth occur?
What effect does an enlarged uterus have on the diaphragm?	This effects the diaphragm by pushing up on it and displacing it from its normal position. As the pregnanct continues, respiratory capacity changes, with increased respiratory rates and decreasing minute volumes. You may observe a pregnant patient's increased breathing rate and a decreased ability for deep respirations.
This effects the diaphragm by pushing up on it and displacing it from its normal position. As the pregnanct continues, respiratory capacity changes, with increased respiratory rates and decreasing minute volumes. You may observe a pregnant patient's increased breathing rate and a decreased ability for deep respirations.	What effect does an enlarged uterus have on the diaphragm?
What changes occur during pregnancy in the cardiovascular system?	During pregnancy, blood volume gradually increases throughout the pregnancy to meet the increased needs of the fetus, to allow for adequate perfusion of the uterus, and to prepare for the blood loss that will occur during childbirth.
During pregnancy, blood volume gradually increases throughout the pregnancy to meet the increased needs of the fetus, to allow for adequate perfusion of the uterus, and to prepare for the blood loss that will occur during childbirth.	What changes occur during pregnancy in the cardiovascular system?
During the third trimester, how long does it take for the woman's entire blood volume to pass through the uterus?	During this time, it takes 8 to 11 minutes for the woman's entire blood volume to pass through the uterus.
During this time, it takes 8 to 11 minutes for the woman's entire blood volume to pass through the uterus.	During the third trimester, how long does it take for the woman's entire blood volume to pass through the uterus?
By the end of a pregnancy, how much will the patient's blood volume have possibly increased?	By the third trimester, this may have increased by as much as 50%.
By the third trimester, this may have increased by as much as 50%.	By the end of a pregnancy, how much will the patient's blood volume have possibly increased?
What does the increased number of blood cells during pregnancy neccesitate?	This neccesitates an increased need for iron, which is why pregnant women are advised to take iron supplements to avoid becoming anemic.
This neccesitates an increased need for iron, which is why pregnant women are advised to take iron supplements to avoid becoming anemic.	What does the increased number of blood cells during pregnancy neccesitate?
How much has the patient's heart rate increased during the third trimester?	This has increased up to 20%, or about 20 more beat per minute, to accomodate the increase in blood volume during this time.
This has increased up to 20%, or about 20 more beat per minute, to accomodate the increase in blood volume during this time.	How much has the patient's heart rate increased during the third trimester?
What happens to a woman's ability to clot during pregnancy?	During this time, a woman's ability to clot increases, in order to protect her from excessive bleeding during delivery.
During this time, a woman's ability to clot increases, in order to protect her from excessive bleeding during delivery.	What happens to a woman's ability to clot during pregnancy?
What does the increased size of the uterus do to the stomach during pregnancy?	This displaces the stomach upwards, and significantly increase the chance that a pregnant trauma patient will vomit and aspirate if you are unable to clear her airway.
This displaces the stomach upwards, and significantly increase the chance that a pregnant trauma patient will vomit and aspirate if you are unable to clear her airway.	What does the increased size of the uterus do to the stomach during pregnancy?
What happens to the musculoskeletal system during pregnancy?	"During pregnancy, increased hormones affect this system by making the joints more ""loose"" or less stable."
"During pregnancy, increased hormones affect this system by making the joints more ""loose"" or less stable."	What happens to the musculoskeletal system during pregnancy?
What are the three stages of labor?	These stages are: dilation of the cervix delivery of the infant and delivery of the placenta
These stages are: dilation of the cervix delivery of the infant and delivery of the placenta	What are the three stages of labor?
When does the first stage of labor begin and end?	This begins with the onset of contractions as the fetus enters the birth canal and ends when the cervix is fully dilated. This is frequently the longest stage of labor, lasting an average of 16 hours for a first delivery, as the cervix has to be streched thin by uterine contractions until the opening is large enough for the infant to pass through into the vagina.
This begins with the onset of contractions as the fetus enters the birth canal and ends when the cervix is fully dilated. This is frequently the longest stage of labor, lasting an average of 16 hours for a first delivery, as the cervix has to be streched thin by uterine contractions until the opening is large enough for the infant to pass through into the vagina.	When does the first stage of labor begin and end?
As contractions become more regular, how long do they last?	These last about 30 to 60 seconds each.
These last about 30 to 60 seconds each.	As contractions become more regular, how long do they last?
What is a primigravida?	This is a woman who is experiencing her first pregnancy. Her labor will typically last longer than a multigravida.
This is a woman who is experiencing her first pregnancy. Her labor will typically last longer than a multigravida.	What is a primigravida?
What is a multigravida?	This is a woman who has experienced previous pregnancies.
This is a woman who has experienced previous pregnancies.	What is a multigravida?
What is lightening?	"This is when, towards the end of the third trimester of pregnancy, the head of the fetus descends into the women's pelvis as the fetus positions for delivery. This movement is accompanied by a sensation, often described as a ""relief"" because once the fetus has moved from under their rib cage, breathing becomes easier."
"This is when, towards the end of the third trimester of pregnancy, the head of the fetus descends into the women's pelvis as the fetus positions for delivery. This movement is accompanied by a sensation, often described as a ""relief"" because once the fetus has moved from under their rib cage, breathing becomes easier."	What is lightening?
When does the second stage of labor begins and end?	This begins when the fetus begins to enter the birth canal and ends when the infant is born.
This begins when the fetus begins to enter the birth canal and ends when the infant is born.	When does the second stage of labor begins and end?
What is crowning?	This is when the top of the infants head begins to appear at the vaginal opening. The perineum will also begin to bulge significantly.
This is when the top of the infants head begins to appear at the vaginal opening. The perineum will also begin to bulge significantly.	What is crowning?
When does the third stage of labor begin and end?	This begins with the birth of the infant and ends with the delivery of the placenta.
This begins with the birth of the infant and ends with the delivery of the placenta.	When does the third stage of labor begin and end?
How long does delivery of the placenta take?	This can take up to 30 minutes, as contractions assist with the separation process and to clamp down and close the blood vessels that were connecting the placenta to the uterine lining.
This can take up to 30 minutes, as contractions assist with the separation process and to clamp down and close the blood vessels that were connecting the placenta to the uterine lining.	How long does delivery of the placenta take?
What is preeclampsia?	This can develop after the 30th week of gestation, and is also called pregnancy-induced hypertension. Signs and symptoms include: Headache Seeing spots Swelling in the hands and feet (edema) Anxiety High blood pressure
This can develop after the 30th week of gestation, and is also called pregnancy-induced hypertension. Signs and symptoms include: Headache Seeing spots Swelling in the hands and feet (edema) Anxiety High blood pressure	What is preeclampsia?
What is eclampsia?	This is characterized by seizures that occur as a result of hypertension. To treat, lie the patient on her left side, maintain an airway, and provide supplemental oxygen with rapid transport.
This is characterized by seizures that occur as a result of hypertension. To treat, lie the patient on her left side, maintain an airway, and provide supplemental oxygen with rapid transport.	What is eclampsia?
What is supine hypotensive syndrome?	This condition is caused by compression of the descending aorta and inferior vena cava by the pregnant uterus when the patient lies supine. Hypotension (low blood pressure) results. Patients in the third trimester should always be transported on their side except during delivery.
This condition is caused by compression of the descending aorta and inferior vena cava by the pregnant uterus when the patient lies supine. Hypotension (low blood pressure) results. Patients in the third trimester should always be transported on their side except during delivery.	What is supine hypotensive syndrome?
How many pregnancies are ectopic?	About 1 in 300 pregnancies are this kind.
About 1 in 300 pregnancies are this kind.	How many pregnancies are ectopic?
What is the leading cause of maternal death in the first trimester of pregnancy?	It is internal hemorrhage into the abdomen following rupture of ectopic pregnancy.
It is internal hemorrhage into the abdomen following rupture of ectopic pregnancy.	What is the leading cause of maternal death in the first trimester of pregnancy?
What should heighten your suspicion of a possible ectopic pregnancy?	A history of pelvic inflammatory disease, tubal ligation, or previous ectopic pregnancies should heighten your suspicion of this.
A history of pelvic inflammatory disease, tubal ligation, or previous ectopic pregnancies should heighten your suspicion of this.	What should heighten your suspicion of a possible ectopic pregnancy?
What is a miscarriage?	This is a spontaneous abortion.
This is a spontaneous abortion.	What is a miscarriage?
What should you do with vaginal hemorrhaging?	In this serious situation, call for ALS backup.
In this serious situation, call for ALS backup.	What should you do with vaginal hemorrhaging?
What is abruptio placenta?	This is when the placenta separates prematurely from the wall of the uterus, and is most commonly from hypertension in the mother and as a result of trauma. Signs and symptoms include severe pain and vaginal bleeding.
This is when the placenta separates prematurely from the wall of the uterus, and is most commonly from hypertension in the mother and as a result of trauma. Signs and symptoms include severe pain and vaginal bleeding.	What is abruptio placenta?
What is placenta previa?	This is when the placenta develops over and covers the cervix.
This is when the placenta develops over and covers the cervix.	What is placenta previa?
What is the difference between contractions during false labor versus true labor?	In the former, contractions are not regular and do not increase in intensity or frequency; contractions come and go. In the latter, contractions, once started, consistently get stronger and closer together; change in position does not relieve contractions.
In the former, contractions are not regular and do not increase in intensity or frequency; contractions come and go. In the latter, contractions, once started, consistently get stronger and closer together; change in position does not relieve contractions.	What is the difference between contractions during false labor versus true labor?
What is the difference between pain during false labor versus true labor?	"In the former, pain is in the lower abdomen; contractions start and stay in the lower abdomen. In the latter, pains and contractions start in the lower back and ""wrap around"" to the lower abdomen."
"In the former, pain is in the lower abdomen; contractions start and stay in the lower abdomen. In the latter, pains and contractions start in the lower back and ""wrap around"" to the lower abdomen."	What is the difference between pain during false labor versus true labor?
What is the difference between activity during false labor versus true labor?	In the former, activity or changing position will alleviate the pain and contractions. In the latter, activity may intensifty the contractions; pain and contractions are consistent in any position.
In the former, activity or changing position will alleviate the pain and contractions. In the latter, activity may intensifty the contractions; pain and contractions are consistent in any position.	What is the difference between activity during false labor versus true labor?
What is the difference between bloody show during false labor versus true labor?	In the former, if there is any bloody show, it is brownish. In the latter, the bloody show will be pink or red and generally accompanied by mucus.
In the former, if there is any bloody show, it is brownish. In the latter, the bloody show will be pink or red and generally accompanied by mucus.	What is the difference between bloody show during false labor versus true labor?
What is the difference between fluid leakage during false labor versus true labor?	In the former, there may be some leakage of fluid, but it is usually urine and will be in small amounts and smell of ammonia. In the latter, the amniotic sac may have broken just before the contractions started or during contractions. A moderate amount of fluid will be present and may smell sweet, and fluid will continue to leak.
In the former, there may be some leakage of fluid, but it is usually urine and will be in small amounts and smell of ammonia. In the latter, the amniotic sac may have broken just before the contractions started or during contractions. A moderate amount of fluid will be present and may smell sweet, and fluid will continue to leak.	What is the difference between fluid leakage during false labor versus true labor?
What is gestational diabetes?	This is diabetes that developes in many women during pregnancy. It will clear up in most women after delivery.
This is diabetes that developes in many women during pregnancy. It will clear up in most women after delivery.	What is gestational diabetes?
What should you consider if you find a pregnant patient with an altered level of consciousness?	In this situation, your assessment should inlcude determining if she has a history of diabetes, and you should check the blood glucose level if local protocols permit.
In this situation, your assessment should inlcude determining if she has a history of diabetes, and you should check the blood glucose level if local protocols permit.	What should you consider if you find a pregnant patient with an altered level of consciousness?
Why do pregnant women have an increased risk of falls?	"Pregnant women have an increased risk of this because hormonal changes ""loosen"" up the joints, and the weight of the uterus and displacement of abdominal organs can change the patients center of gravity."
"Pregnant women have an increased risk of this because hormonal changes ""loosen"" up the joints, and the weight of the uterus and displacement of abdominal organs can change the patients center of gravity."	Why do pregnant women have an increased risk of falls?
What percentage of penetrating abdominal trauma in pregnant patients results in fetal injury?	70% of these results in fetal injury.
70% of these results in fetal injury.	What percentage of penetrating abdominal trauma in pregnant patients results in fetal injury?
In pregnant trauma patients, when should you suspect abruptio placenta?	In pregnant trauma patients, you should suspect this when the MOI is blunt trauma to the abdomen and the patient's signs and symptoms are suggestive of shock.
In pregnant trauma patients, you should suspect this when the MOI is blunt trauma to the abdomen and the patient's signs and symptoms are suggestive of shock.	In pregnant trauma patients, when should you suspect abruptio placenta?
Where should a seatbelt properly be worn on pregnant women?	With these patients, the lap belt should be placed under the abdomen and over the hip bones, and the shoulder belt should be positioned between the breasts.
With these patients, the lap belt should be placed under the abdomen and over the hip bones, and the shoulder belt should be positioned between the breasts.	Where should a seatbelt properly be worn on pregnant women?
When dealing with a pregnant patient and her fetus, whom should you focus on?	In this situation, your focus is on the assessment and management of the woman.
In this situation, your focus is on the assessment and management of the woman.	When dealing with a pregnant patient and her fetus, whom should you focus on?
When treating a pregnant trauma, what are the five guidelines to follow?	With these patients, follow these five guidelines: 1) Maintain and open airway. 2) Administer high-flow oxygen. 3) Ensure adequate ventilation (listen for bilateral lung sounds). 4) Assess circulation (keep patient warm). 5) Transport on left side (tilt backboard to the left with towels), with ALS intercept.
With these patients, follow these five guidelines: 1) Maintain and open airway. 2) Administer high-flow oxygen. 3) Ensure adequate ventilation (listen for bilateral lung sounds). 4) Assess circulation (keep patient warm). 5) Transport on left side (tilt backboard to the left with towels), with ALS intercept.	When treating a pregnant trauma, what are the five guidelines to follow?
Where is the top of the uterus at 20 weeks?	By this time, the top of the uterus has grown to the level of the patient's belly button.
By this time, the top of the uterus has grown to the level of the patient's belly button.	Where is the top of the uterus at 20 weeks?
What PPE should be used during a field delivery?	For this situation, a mask gown should be used in addition to gloves and eye protection.
For this situation, a mask gown should be used in addition to gloves and eye protection.	What PPE should be used during a field delivery?
In the late 1700s, what was one of the most advanced professional emergency medical patient care systems in the world?	In the late 1700s, Napoleon Bonaparte had one of the world's most advanced system of this in the world.
In the late 1700s, Napoleon Bonaparte had one of the world's most advanced system of this in the world.	In the late 1700s, what was one of the most advanced professional emergency medical patient care systems in the world?
When did American hospitals initiate their own professional ambulance services?	These began initiating their own professional ambulance services during the late 1860s.
These began initiating their own professional ambulance services during the late 1860s.	When did American hospitals initiate their own professional ambulance services?
What is an ambulance?	This is a vehicle that is used for treating and transporting patients who need emergency medical care to a hospital.
This is a vehicle that is used for treating and transporting patients who need emergency medical care to a hospital.	What is an ambulance?
When was the first motor-powered ambulance introduced?	This was first introduced in 1906.
This was first introduced in 1906.	When was the first motor-powered ambulance introduced?
What are first responder vehicles?	These are vehicles whuch respond initially to the scene with personnel and equipment to treat the sick and injured until an amublance can arrive.
These are vehicles whuch respond initially to the scene with personnel and equipment to treat the sick and injured until an amublance can arrive.	What are first responder vehicles?
According to the National Research Council of the National Academy of Sciences, what features must a modern ambulance have?	According to this organization, such a vehicle has the following features: A driver's compartment A patient compartment that can accommodate two EMTs and two supine patients (one on the strecher, one on the bench) positioned so that at least one the patients can receive CPR during transport. Equipment and supplies to provide emergency medical care at the scene and during transport, to safeguard personnel and patients from hazardous conditions, and to carry out light extrication procedures. Two-way radio communication so that ambulance personnel can speak with the dispatcher, the hospital, public safety authorities, and online medical control. Design and construction that ensure maximum safety and comfort.
According to this organization, such a vehicle has the following features: A driver's compartment A patient compartment that can accommodate two EMTs and two supine patients (one on the strecher, one on the bench) positioned so that at least one the patients can receive CPR during transport. Equipment and supplies to provide emergency medical care at the scene and during transport, to safeguard personnel and patients from hazardous conditions, and to carry out light extrication procedures. Two-way radio communication so that ambulance personnel can speak with the dispatcher, the hospital, public safety authorities, and online medical control. Design and construction that ensure maximum safety and comfort.	According to the National Research Council of the National Academy of Sciences, what features must a modern ambulance have?
What is a type I ambulance design?	This is a conventional, truck cab-chassis with a modular ambulance body that can be transferred to a newer chassis as needed.
This is a conventional, truck cab-chassis with a modular ambulance body that can be transferred to a newer chassis as needed.	What is a type I ambulance design?
What is a type II ambulance design?	This is a standard van, forward-control integral cab-body ambulance.
This is a standard van, forward-control integral cab-body ambulance.	What is a type II ambulance design?
What is a type III ambulance design?	This is a specialty van, forward-control integral cab-body ambulance.
This is a specialty van, forward-control integral cab-body ambulance.	What is a type III ambulance design?
How do you identify vehicles as ambulances?	These are identified by the six-pointed Star of Life emblem.
These are identified by the six-pointed Star of Life emblem.	How do you identify vehicles as ambulances?
What are the nine phases of an ambulance call?	The nine phases of this are: 1) preparation 2) dispatch 3) en route 4) arrival at scene 5) transfer to patient to ambulance 6) en route to receiving facility (transport) 7) delivery (at the receiving facility) 8) en route to station 9) postrun
The nine phases of this are: 1) preparation 2) dispatch 3) en route 4) arrival at scene 5) transfer to patient to ambulance 6) en route to receiving facility (transport) 7) delivery (at the receiving facility) 8) en route to station 9) postrun	What are the nine phases of an ambulance call?
What is an important part of the preparation phase?	An important part of this phase is making sure that equipment and supplies are in their proper places.
An important part of this phase is making sure that equipment and supplies are in their proper places.	What is an important part of the preparation phase?
What is a general rule regarding equipment?	As a general rule, the more complex one of these is and the harder it is to use, the more likely it is to malfunction during an emergency.
As a general rule, the more complex one of these is and the harder it is to use, the more likely it is to malfunction during an emergency.	What is a general rule regarding equipment?
When should new equipment be placed on an ambulance?	This should only be placed on an ambulance after proper instruction on its use and consulting with the medical director.
This should only be placed on an ambulance after proper instruction on its use and consulting with the medical director.	When should new equipment be placed on an ambulance?
How should equipment be stored in the ambulance?	This should be stored here according to how urgently and how often they are used.
This should be stored here according to how urgently and how often they are used.	How should equipment be stored in the ambulance?
What are the kinds of supplies typically carried in an ambulance?	These kinds are: 1) Basic supplies 2) Airway and ventilation equipment 3) Basic Wound Care Supplies 4) Splinting Supplies 5) Childbirth Supplies 6) Automated External Defibrillator 7) Patient Transfer Equipment 8) Medications and Other Supplies
These kinds are: 1) Basic supplies 2) Airway and ventilation equipment 3) Basic Wound Care Supplies 4) Splinting Supplies 5) Childbirth Supplies 6) Automated External Defibrillator 7) Patient Transfer Equipment 8) Medications and Other Supplies	What are the kinds of supplies typically carried in an ambulance?
What are some basic supplies found in ambulances?	These include: disposable gloves and sharps, sterile sheets, blankets and towels, disposable emesis bags or basins, boxes of disposable tissue, bedpans and urinals, blood pressure cuffs, stethoscopes, disposable drinking cups, unbreakable container of water, wet wipes, cold/hot packs, sterile irrigation fluid, restraining devices, plastic bags for waste, and sets of hearing protectors.
These include: disposable gloves and sharps, sterile sheets, blankets and towels, disposable emesis bags or basins, boxes of disposable tissue, bedpans and urinals, blood pressure cuffs, stethoscopes, disposable drinking cups, unbreakable container of water, wet wipes, cold/hot packs, sterile irrigation fluid, restraining devices, plastic bags for waste, and sets of hearing protectors.	What are some basic supplies found in ambulances?
What are some airway and ventilation equipment found in an ambulance?	Some of these include: Oropharyngeal airways for adults, children, and infants Nasopharyngeal airways for adults and children Two sets of advanced airway procedure equipment (one in the ambulance and one in the jump kit) as regulated by state and local regulations Bag-mask devices capable of oxygen enrichment are able to supply 100% oxygen A portable and mounted suctioning unit
Some of these include: Oropharyngeal airways for adults, children, and infants Nasopharyngeal airways for adults and children Two sets of advanced airway procedure equipment (one in the ambulance and one in the jump kit) as regulated by state and local regulations Bag-mask devices capable of oxygen enrichment are able to supply 100% oxygen A portable and mounted suctioning unit	What are some airway and ventilation equipment found in an ambulance?
How powerful must the suctioning units found in an ambulance be?	These must be powerful enough to generate a vacuum of 300 mm Hg when the tube is clamped.
These must be powerful enough to generate a vacuum of 300 mm Hg when the tube is clamped.	How powerful must the suctioning units found in an ambulance be?
What the minimum capacity required for the portable oxygen supply unit in an ambulance?	This should have a minimum of 500 L of oxygen and be able to deliver oxygen at a variable rate between 1 and 15 L/min (NB: at least one extra canister should be kept onboard as well).
This should have a minimum of 500 L of oxygen and be able to deliver oxygen at a variable rate between 1 and 15 L/min (NB: at least one extra canister should be kept onboard as well).	What the minimum capacity required for the portable oxygen supply unit in an ambulance?
What's the minimum capacity required for the mounted oxygen unit in the ambulance?	This should have a capacity of 3,000 L.
This should have a capacity of 3,000 L.	What's the minimum capacity required for the mounted oxygen unit in the ambulance?
Which ambulance services should have a disposable, single-use humidifier for the mounted oxygen system?	Ambulance services that often transport patients on runs lasting longer than 1 hour should have one of these.
Ambulance services that often transport patients on runs lasting longer than 1 hour should have one of these.	Which ambulance services should have a disposable, single-use humidifier for the mounted oxygen system?
What is a CPR board?	This provides a firm surface under the patient's torso so that you can give effective chest compressions, as well as establishing an appropriate degree of head tilt.
This provides a firm surface under the patient's torso so that you can give effective chest compressions, as well as establishing an appropriate degree of head tilt.	What is a CPR board?
What should you use if you don't have a CPR board?	"If you don't have one of these, you can place a long or short backboard under the patient on the strecher, and use a tightly rolled sheet or towel to raise the patient's shoulders 3"" to 4"", as this will keep the patient's head in a position of maximum backward tilt."
"If you don't have one of these, you can place a long or short backboard under the patient on the strecher, and use a tightly rolled sheet or towel to raise the patient's shoulders 3"" to 4"", as this will keep the patient's head in a position of maximum backward tilt."	What should you use if you don't have a CPR board?
What are some basic wound care supplies carried in all ambulances?	These include: trauma shears sterile sheets sterile burn sheets adhesive tape in several widths self-adhering, soft roller bandages Sterile dressings gauze abdominal or laparotomy pads sterile universal trauma dressings sterile, occlusive, nonadherent dressings adhesive bandages a tourniquet (sometimes) an adult-size pneumatic antishock garment
These include: trauma shears sterile sheets sterile burn sheets adhesive tape in several widths self-adhering, soft roller bandages Sterile dressings gauze abdominal or laparotomy pads sterile universal trauma dressings sterile, occlusive, nonadherent dressings adhesive bandages a tourniquet (sometimes) an adult-size pneumatic antishock garment	What are some basic wound care supplies carried in all ambulances?
What are some splinting supplies found in an ambulance?	These include: an adult-size traction splint a child-size traction splint arm and leg splints triangular bandages roller bandages short backboard device long backboard head immobilization devices cervical collars in adjustable sizes
These include: an adult-size traction splint a child-size traction splint arm and leg splints triangular bandages roller bandages short backboard device long backboard head immobilization devices cervical collars in adjustable sizes	What are some splinting supplies found in an ambulance?
What is found inside an emergency obstetric kit?	These kits include: a pair of sugical scissors, hemostats or special cord clamps, umbilical tape or sterilized cord a small rubber bulb syringe towels gauze sponges pairs of sterile gloves sanitary napkins a plastic bag baby stocking cap baby blanket
These kits include: a pair of sugical scissors, hemostats or special cord clamps, umbilical tape or sterilized cord a small rubber bulb syringe towels gauze sponges pairs of sterile gloves sanitary napkins a plastic bag baby stocking cap baby blanket	What is found inside an emergency obstetric kit?
When was the first prehospital use of a defibrillator?	This was first used in the late 1970s in New York City, by Doctor William Grace.
This was first used in the late 1970s in New York City, by Doctor William Grace.	When was the first prehospital use of a defibrillator?
What kind of patient transfer equipment can be found in all ambulances?	These include: A primary wheeled ambulance strecher A wheeled stair chair for use in narrow spaces A long backboard A short backboard or short immobilization device A scoop stretcher A folding stretcher A basket stretcher
These include: A primary wheeled ambulance strecher A wheeled stair chair for use in narrow spaces A long backboard A short backboard or short immobilization device A scoop stretcher A folding stretcher A basket stretcher	What kind of patient transfer equipment can be found in all ambulances?
What is a jump kit?	This contains anything you might need in the first 5 minutes with the patient except for the semiautomated external defibrillator and oxygen cylinder.
This contains anything you might need in the first 5 minutes with the patient except for the semiautomated external defibrillator and oxygen cylinder.	What is a jump kit?
What kind of equipment can be found in a jump kit?	"These include: Disposable gloves Triangular bandages trauma shears adhesive tape in various widths universal trauma dressings self-adhering soft roller bandages, 4""x 5 yd and 2"" x 5 yd Oropharyngeal airways in adult, child, and infant sizes Bag-mask device with masks for adults, children, and infants Blood pressure cuff stethoscope penlight sterile gauze dressings, 4"" x 4"" sterile dressings, 6"" x 9"" or 8"" x 10"" adhesive strips oral glucose activated charcoal"
"These include: Disposable gloves Triangular bandages trauma shears adhesive tape in various widths universal trauma dressings self-adhering soft roller bandages, 4""x 5 yd and 2"" x 5 yd Oropharyngeal airways in adult, child, and infant sizes Bag-mask device with masks for adults, children, and infants Blood pressure cuff stethoscope penlight sterile gauze dressings, 4"" x 4"" sterile dressings, 6"" x 9"" or 8"" x 10"" adhesive strips oral glucose activated charcoal"	What kind of equipment can be found in a jump kit?
What kind of personal safety equipment should an ambulance have at all times?	These include: Face shields gowns, shoe covers, caps turnout gear helmets with face shields or safety goggles safety shoes or boots
These include: Face shields gowns, shoe covers, caps turnout gear helmets with face shields or safety goggles safety shoes or boots	What kind of personal safety equipment should an ambulance have at all times?
What kind of equipment for work areas should an ambulance have at all times?	These include: Warning devices that flash or have reflectors Two high-intensity halogen 20,000 candlepower flashlights fire extinguisher, type BC, dry powder, 5-lb minimum hard hats or helmets with faceshields or safety goggles portalbe floodlights
These include: Warning devices that flash or have reflectors Two high-intensity halogen 20,000 candlepower flashlights fire extinguisher, type BC, dry powder, 5-lb minimum hard hats or helmets with faceshields or safety goggles portalbe floodlights	What kind of equipment for work areas should an ambulance have at all times?
What are some kinds of extrication equipment every ambulance should have onboard?	"These include: A 12 inch adjustable wrench A 12 standard square bar screwdriver An 8 Phillips head #2 screwdriver Hacksaw with 12"" wire blades 10"" vise-grip pliers 5-lb hammer with 15"" handle 24"" fire ax 24"" wrecking bar 51"" crowbar, pitch point Bolt cutter with 1"" to 1 1/4 jaw opening Folding shovel with pointed blade Tin snips, double action, 8"" minimum Gauntlets, reinforced Rescue blankets Ropes, 5,400 lb tensile strength in 50' length Mastic knife Spring-load center punch Roll of duct tape Pruning saw Heavy-duty 2"" x 4"" and 4"" x 4"" shoring blocks"
"These include: A 12 inch adjustable wrench A 12 standard square bar screwdriver An 8 Phillips head #2 screwdriver Hacksaw with 12"" wire blades 10"" vise-grip pliers 5-lb hammer with 15"" handle 24"" fire ax 24"" wrecking bar 51"" crowbar, pitch point Bolt cutter with 1"" to 1 1/4 jaw opening Folding shovel with pointed blade Tin snips, double action, 8"" minimum Gauntlets, reinforced Rescue blankets Ropes, 5,400 lb tensile strength in 50' length Mastic knife Spring-load center punch Roll of duct tape Pruning saw Heavy-duty 2"" x 4"" and 4"" x 4"" shoring blocks"	What are some kinds of extrication equipment every ambulance should have onboard?
What should you check during an ambulance inspection?	During this, the following should be checked: Fuel level Oil level Transmission fluid level Engine cooling system and fluid levels Batteries Brake fluid Engine belts Wheels and tires, including spares All interior and exterior lights Windshield wipers and fluid Horn Siren Air conditioners and heaters Ventilating system Doors Communication systems All windows and mirrors.
During this, the following should be checked: Fuel level Oil level Transmission fluid level Engine cooling system and fluid levels Batteries Brake fluid Engine belts Wheels and tires, including spares All interior and exterior lights Windshield wipers and fluid Horn Siren Air conditioners and heaters Ventilating system Doors Communication systems All windows and mirrors.	What should you check during an ambulance inspection?
How should portable oxygen tanks always be secured?	These should always be secured by fixed clasps or housings. Never attempt to secure a tank to the stretcher or bench, unless using a commercially manufactured device specifically designed for such purpose.
These should always be secured by fixed clasps or housings. Never attempt to secure a tank to the stretcher or bench, unless using a commercially manufactured device specifically designed for such purpose.	How should portable oxygen tanks always be secured?
What is the minimum information gathered by the dispatcher during the dispatch phase of a call?	The dispatcher will gather in the following information during this phase: The nature of the call The name, present location, and call-back telephone number The location(s) of the patient(s) The number of patients and some idea of the severity of their conditions Any other special problems or pertinent information
The dispatcher will gather in the following information during this phase: The nature of the call The name, present location, and call-back telephone number The location(s) of the patient(s) The number of patients and some idea of the severity of their conditions Any other special problems or pertinent information	What is the minimum information gathered by the dispatcher during the dispatch phase of a call?
What can you report to dispatch after you arrive on scene and perform a scene size up first?	In this situation, you should provide dispatch with your information, which will help them decide if en route units should continue to the scene.
In this situation, you should provide dispatch with your information, which will help them decide if en route units should continue to the scene.	What can you report to dispatch after you arrive on scene and perform a scene size up first?
What should you do if you are the first EMT at the scene of a mass-casualty incident?	If this occurs, quickly estimate the number of patients, and communicate with the incident commander.
If this occurs, quickly estimate the number of patients, and communicate with the incident commander.	What should you do if you are the first EMT at the scene of a mass-casualty incident?
Where and how should you park the ambulance?	You should park this about 100 feet past the scene on the same side of the road, in a location that will not hamper leaving the scene. Parking before the scene creates a barrier between you and oncoming traffic, and may also be a good idea. It is best to park uphill and upwind of the scene if smoke or hazardous materials are present. Always leave your warning lights or devices on.
You should park this about 100 feet past the scene on the same side of the road, in a location that will not hamper leaving the scene. Parking before the scene creates a barrier between you and oncoming traffic, and may also be a good idea. It is best to park uphill and upwind of the scene if smoke or hazardous materials are present. Always leave your warning lights or devices on.	Where and how should you park the ambulance?
When should you concern yourself with restoring the flow of traffic?	You should only concern yourself with this when all patients have been treated and the emergency situation is under control.
You should only concern yourself with this when all patients have been treated and the emergency situation is under control.	When should you concern yourself with restoring the flow of traffic?
How do you properly secure a patient in the ambulance so the are not injured by sudden deceleration?	To prevent this, use deceleration or stopping straps over the shoulders.
To prevent this, use deceleration or stopping straps over the shoulders.	How do you properly secure a patient in the ambulance so the are not injured by sudden deceleration?
When you are ready to leave the scene with the patient (transport phase), what info should you report to dispatch?	At this point, report the number of patients, the name of the receiving hospital, and the beginning mileage of the ambulance. Then report online medical control about your patient(s) and the nature of the problem(s).
At this point, report the number of patients, the name of the receiving hospital, and the beginning mileage of the ambulance. Then report online medical control about your patient(s) and the nature of the problem(s).	When you are ready to leave the scene with the patient (transport phase), what info should you report to dispatch?
What is an important thing to remember during the transport phase?	During this phase, it is important to not abandon the patient emotionally.
During this phase, it is important to not abandon the patient emotionally.	What is an important thing to remember during the transport phase?
What are the steps to follow to transfer the patient to the receiving hospital (delivery phase)?	During this phase, follow these steps: 1) Report your arrival to the triage nurse or other arrival personnel. 2) Physically transfer the patient from the stretcher to the bed directed for your patient. 3) Present a complete verbal report at the bedside to the nurse or physician who is taking over the patient's care. 4) Complete a detailed written report, obtain the required signatures, and leave a copy with an appropriate staff member.
During this phase, follow these steps: 1) Report your arrival to the triage nurse or other arrival personnel. 2) Physically transfer the patient from the stretcher to the bed directed for your patient. 3) Present a complete verbal report at the bedside to the nurse or physician who is taking over the patient's care. 4) Complete a detailed written report, obtain the required signatures, and leave a copy with an appropriate staff member.	What are the steps to follow to transfer the patient to the receiving hospital (delivery phase)?
What do you need to inform dispatch about once you leave the hospital (en route to station phase)?	During this phase, you need to inform dispatch as to whether you are in service and where you are going.
During this phase, you need to inform dispatch as to whether you are in service and where you are going.	What do you need to inform dispatch about once you leave the hospital (en route to station phase)?
What should you do as soon as you are back at the station?	At this time, you should: 1) Clean and disinfect the ambulance and any equipment that was used, if you did not do so before leaving the hospital. 2) Restock any supplies you did not get at the hospital.
At this time, you should: 1) Clean and disinfect the ambulance and any equipment that was used, if you did not do so before leaving the hospital. 2) Restock any supplies you did not get at the hospital.	What should you do as soon as you are back at the station?
What should you do during the postrun phase?	During this phase, you should complete and file any additional written reports. You are also responsible at this time for maintaining the ambulance so that it is safe and available on a moment's notice.
During this phase, you should complete and file any additional written reports. You are also responsible at this time for maintaining the ambulance so that it is safe and available on a moment's notice.	What should you do during the postrun phase?
What is cleaning?	This is the process of removing dirt, dust, blood, or other visible contaminants from a surface or equipment.
This is the process of removing dirt, dust, blood, or other visible contaminants from a surface or equipment.	What is cleaning?
What is disinfection?	This is the killing of pathogenic agents by directly applying a chemical made for that purpose to a surface or equipment.
This is the killing of pathogenic agents by directly applying a chemical made for that purpose to a surface or equipment.	What is disinfection?
What is high-level disinfection?	This is the killing of pathogenic agents by the use of potent means of disinfection.
This is the killing of pathogenic agents by the use of potent means of disinfection.	What is high-level disinfection?
What is sterilization?	This is a process, such as the use of heat, that removes all microbial contamination.
This is a process, such as the use of heat, that removes all microbial contamination.	What is sterilization?
What basic steps should you follow after every call?	After this, do the following: 1) Strip used linens from the stretcher immediately after use, and place them in a plastic bag or in the designated receptacle in the emergency department. 2) In an appropriate receptable, discard all disposable equipment used for care of the patient that meets your state's definition of medical waste. 3) Wash contaminated areas with soap and water. 4) Disinfect all nondisposable equipment used in the care of the patient. 5) Clean the stretcher with an EPA-registered germicidal/virucidal solution or bleach and water at 1:100 dilution. 6) If any spillage or other contamination occurred in the ambulance, clean it with the same solution. 7) Create a schedule for routine full cleaning of the ambulance. 8) Have a written policy/procedure for cleaning each piece of equipment.
After this, do the following: 1) Strip used linens from the stretcher immediately after use, and place them in a plastic bag or in the designated receptacle in the emergency department. 2) In an appropriate receptable, discard all disposable equipment used for care of the patient that meets your state's definition of medical waste. 3) Wash contaminated areas with soap and water. 4) Disinfect all nondisposable equipment used in the care of the patient. 5) Clean the stretcher with an EPA-registered germicidal/virucidal solution or bleach and water at 1:100 dilution. 6) If any spillage or other contamination occurred in the ambulance, clean it with the same solution. 7) Create a schedule for routine full cleaning of the ambulance. 8) Have a written policy/procedure for cleaning each piece of equipment.	What basic steps should you follow after every call?
How many ambulances are involved in crashes each year in the US?	More than 6,000 of these are involved in crashes each year in the US.
More than 6,000 of these are involved in crashes each year in the US.	How many ambulances are involved in crashes each year in the US?
How many fatal ambulance accidents occurred between 1991 and 2001 according to the Center for Disease Control and Prevention?	In this time period, there were 300 fatal abulance accidents with 275 pedestrians and motorists killed. 82 fatalities were onboard the ambulance, of which 27 were EMS personnel.
In this time period, there were 300 fatal abulance accidents with 275 pedestrians and motorists killed. 82 fatalities were onboard the ambulance, of which 27 were EMS personnel.	How many fatal ambulance accidents occurred between 1991 and 2001 according to the Center for Disease Control and Prevention?
What is the first rule in ambulance driving?	This rule is: Speed does not save lives; good care does.
This rule is: Speed does not save lives; good care does.	What is the first rule in ambulance driving?
Studies show that what percentage of EMTs wear seatbelts in the ambulance?	Studies show that fewer than half do this.
Studies show that fewer than half do this.	Studies show that what percentage of EMTs wear seatbelts in the ambulance?
What are some guidelines for safe ambulance driving?	Some guidelines for this are as follows: 1) Select the shortest and least congested route to the scene at the time of the dispatch. 2) Avoid routes with heavy traffic congestion; know alternative routes to each hospital during rush hours. 3) Avoid one-way streets; they may become clogged. 4) Watch carefully for bystanders as you approach the scene. 5) Park the ambulance in a safe place once you arrive at the scene. If you park facing into traffic, turn off your headlights so they do not blind oncoming drivers unless needed to illuminate the scene. If the vehicle is blocking part of the road, keep your warning lights on to alert oncoming motorists; otherwise, turn them off. 6) Drive within the speed limit while transporting patients, except in the rare extreme emergency. 7) Go with the flow of the traffic. 8) Always drive defensively. 9) Always maintain a safe following distance. Stay at least 4 seconds behind another vehicle in the same lane. 10) Try to maintain an open space or cushion in the lane next to you as an escape route. 11) Use your siren if you turn on the emergency lights, except when you are on a freeway. 12) Always assume that other drivers will not hear the siren or see your emergency lights. 13) When driving on a multilane highway, you should stay in the extreme left-hand lane.
Some guidelines for this are as follows: 1) Select the shortest and least congested route to the scene at the time of the dispatch. 2) Avoid routes with heavy traffic congestion; know alternative routes to each hospital during rush hours. 3) Avoid one-way streets; they may become clogged. 4) Watch carefully for bystanders as you approach the scene. 5) Park the ambulance in a safe place once you arrive at the scene. If you park facing into traffic, turn off your headlights so they do not blind oncoming drivers unless needed to illuminate the scene. If the vehicle is blocking part of the road, keep your warning lights on to alert oncoming motorists; otherwise, turn them off. 6) Drive within the speed limit while transporting patients, except in the rare extreme emergency. 7) Go with the flow of the traffic. 8) Always drive defensively. 9) Always maintain a safe following distance. Stay at least 4 seconds behind another vehicle in the same lane. 10) Try to maintain an open space or cushion in the lane next to you as an escape route. 11) Use your siren if you turn on the emergency lights, except when you are on a freeway. 12) Always assume that other drivers will not hear the siren or see your emergency lights. 13) When driving on a multilane highway, you should stay in the extreme left-hand lane.	What are some guidelines for safe ambulance driving?
How might the PA system make the situation worse when driving?	This might make the situation worse because motorists may hesitate or make unexpected moves so that they can hear or follow instructions.
This might make the situation worse because motorists may hesitate or make unexpected moves so that they can hear or follow instructions.	How might the PA system make the situation worse when driving?
Where are the 3 blind spots on an ambulance?	These 3 are: 1) The mirror itself, which can obstruct the view ahead. 2) The rear; use a spotter when backing up. 3) The side of the vehicle.
These 3 are: 1) The mirror itself, which can obstruct the view ahead. 2) The rear; use a spotter when backing up. 3) The side of the vehicle.	Where are the 3 blind spots on an ambulance?
What is a cushion of safety?	"This is keeping a safe distance (c. 4 ""seconds"") between the ambulance and other vehicles on the road."
"This is keeping a safe distance (c. 4 ""seconds"") between the ambulance and other vehicles on the road."	What is a cushion of safety?
What is something your partner in the rear can do to discourage tailgaters?	This person can stay alert for tailgaters in the rear compartment, and can look like they are visibly writing down the license plates of any tailgating cars.
This person can stay alert for tailgaters in the rear compartment, and can look like they are visibly writing down the license plates of any tailgating cars.	What is something your partner in the rear can do to discourage tailgaters?
What is the best way to distance oneself from a tailgater?	The best way to handle this situation is to slow down, NOT speed up; the other driver will likely get annoyed and speed past.
The best way to handle this situation is to slow down, NOT speed up; the other driver will likely get annoyed and speed past.	What is the best way to distance oneself from a tailgater?
What kind of protection do most states offer emergency vehicles traveling beyond the speed limit in emergencies?	Most states offer little or no protection against prosecution in the event of this.
Most states offer little or no protection against prosecution in the event of this.	What kind of protection do most states offer emergency vehicles traveling beyond the speed limit in emergencies?
What is important to consider regarding type I and III vehicles?	It is important to remember these vehicles are wider than they look from behind the steering.
It is important to remember these vehicles are wider than they look from behind the steering.	What is important to consider regarding type I and III vehicles?
What factors greatly influence braking and stopping distances?	A vehicle's size and weight greatly influence these.
A vehicle's size and weight greatly influence these.	What factors greatly influence braking and stopping distances?
What should you do if you run into unexpected traffic congestion?	In this situation, remember to notify the dispatcher so that other emergency vehicles can select alternative routes.
In this situation, remember to notify the dispatcher so that other emergency vehicles can select alternative routes.	What should you do if you run into unexpected traffic congestion?
At what speed can hydroplaning occur?	"At speeds of greater than 30 mph, this may occur as water ""piles up"" under the tires."
"At speeds of greater than 30 mph, this may occur as water ""piles up"" under the tires."	At what speed can hydroplaning occur?
If you are on an emergency call and are using your warning lights and siren, what are you allowed to do?	In this situation, you are allowed to do the following: Park or stand in an otherwise illegal location Proceed through a red traffic light or stop sign, but never without stopping first Drive faster than the posted speed limit Drive against the flow of traffic on a one-way street or make a turn that is normally illegal Travel left of center to make an otherwise illegal pass [NB: These exemptions vary by state and local jurisdiction]
In this situation, you are allowed to do the following: Park or stand in an otherwise illegal location Proceed through a red traffic light or stop sign, but never without stopping first Drive faster than the posted speed limit Drive against the flow of traffic on a one-way street or make a turn that is normally illegal Travel left of center to make an otherwise illegal pass [NB: These exemptions vary by state and local jurisdiction]	If you are on an emergency call and are using your warning lights and siren, what are you allowed to do?
What is an emergency vehicle NEVER allowed to do?	"This is NEVER allowed to pass a school bus that has stopped to load or unload children and is displaying its flashing red lights or extended ""stop arm""."
"This is NEVER allowed to pass a school bus that has stopped to load or unload children and is displaying its flashing red lights or extended ""stop arm""."	What is an emergency vehicle NEVER allowed to do?
What are the 3 basic principles that govern the use of warning lights and sirens on an ambulance?	The 3 basic principles are: 1) The unit must be on a true emergency call to the best of your knowledge. 2) Both audible and visual warning devices must be used simultaneously. 3) The unit must be operated with due regard for the safety of all others, on and off the roadway.
The 3 basic principles are: 1) The unit must be on a true emergency call to the best of your knowledge. 2) Both audible and visual warning devices must be used simultaneously. 3) The unit must be operated with due regard for the safety of all others, on and off the roadway.	What are the 3 basic principles that govern the use of warning lights and sirens on an ambulance?
Why can using a police escort be dangerous?	This can be dangerous because when other motorists hear a siren and see a police car passing, they might assume that the police car is the only emergency vehicle and not see the ambulance. This is justified only when you are in unfamiliar terrain and need a guide as much as an escort.
This can be dangerous because when other motorists hear a siren and see a police car passing, they might assume that the police car is the only emergency vehicle and not see the ambulance. This is justified only when you are in unfamiliar terrain and need a guide as much as an escort.	Why can using a police escort be dangerous?
When can an emergency vehicle exceed the speed limit in a school zone.	An emergency vehicle can NEVER exceed the speed limit in these zones.
An emergency vehicle can NEVER exceed the speed limit in these zones.	When can an emergency vehicle exceed the speed limit in a school zone.
What does MDT stand for?	This stands for mobile dispatch terminals.
This stands for mobile dispatch terminals.	What does MDT stand for?
What are air ambulances?	These are used to evacuate medical and trauma patients. There are two different types: fixed-wing and rotary-winged.
These are used to evacuate medical and trauma patients. There are two different types: fixed-wing and rotary-winged.	What are air ambulances?
When are fixed-winged aircraft used for medievac?	These are usually used for interhospital patient transfers over distances greater than 100 to 150 miles.
These are usually used for interhospital patient transfers over distances greater than 100 to 150 miles.	When are fixed-winged aircraft used for medievac?
How fast do most helicopters used for emergency medical operations fly?	These fly in excess of 100 mph.
These fly in excess of 100 mph.	How fast do most helicopters used for emergency medical operations fly?
What is a medivac?	This is a medical evacuation of a patient, generally performed by helicopters.
This is a medical evacuation of a patient, generally performed by helicopters.	What is a medivac?
Why call for a medivac?	Do this if: the transport time to the hospital by ground is too long considering the patients condition. ... ... ... Road or environmental conditions prohibit the use of a ground ambulance. ... The patient requires advanced care that you are unable to provide, such as medication or other specialized procedures. ... Multiple other patients will overwhelm the hospital reachable by ground transport.
Do this if: the transport time to the hospital by ground is too long considering the patients condition. ... ... ... Road or environmental conditions prohibit the use of a ground ambulance. ... The patient requires advanced care that you are unable to provide, such as medication or other specialized procedures. ... Multiple other patients will overwhelm the hospital reachable by ground transport.	Why call for a medivac?
Who receives a medivac?	These should be utilized for patients with time-dependent injuries or illnesses, such as serious spinal injury, strokes, heart attacks, scuba diving accidents, and limb replantation.
These should be utilized for patients with time-dependent injuries or illnesses, such as serious spinal injury, strokes, heart attacks, scuba diving accidents, and limb replantation.	Who receives a medivac?
Whom do you call for a medivac?	Generally, you call your dispatcher for one of these. You may be able to access the crew on a specially designated radio frequency once it has been initiated.
Generally, you call your dispatcher for one of these. You may be able to access the crew on a specially designated radio frequency once it has been initiated.	Whom do you call for a medivac?
What are the most dangerous phases of air transport?	The most dangerous phases of this are take off and landing.
The most dangerous phases of this are take off and landing.	What are the most dangerous phases of air transport?
What is the most dangerous mode of operation for a helicopter?	This mode of operation for a helicopter is flying straight up and down.
This mode of operation for a helicopter is flying straight up and down.	What is the most dangerous mode of operation for a helicopter?
What method of landing allows for safer operations on a helicopter?	Taking off at an angle is a safer method for this.
Taking off at an angle is a safer method for this.	What method of landing allows for safer operations on a helicopter?
When selecting and establishing a landing zone, what guidelines should be considered?	In this situation, consider the following: The area should be a hard or grassy level surface of c. 100' x 100' and no less than 60' x 60'. The area musts be clear of all loose debris, including trashbins, flares, accident tape, medical equipment and supplies. Survey the area for overhead or tall hazards such as powerlines, antenna, and tall trees. Mark the site with weighted cones on positioned emergency vehicles at the corners with headlights facing inward to form an X (Do not use flares) Move all nonessentials outside of the landing zone. Advise on wind strength and direction, using a bed sheet secured to a tree or pole as a directional aid (Never tape).
In this situation, consider the following: The area should be a hard or grassy level surface of c. 100' x 100' and no less than 60' x 60'. The area musts be clear of all loose debris, including trashbins, flares, accident tape, medical equipment and supplies. Survey the area for overhead or tall hazards such as powerlines, antenna, and tall trees. Mark the site with weighted cones on positioned emergency vehicles at the corners with headlights facing inward to form an X (Do not use flares) Move all nonessentials outside of the landing zone. Advise on wind strength and direction, using a bed sheet secured to a tree or pole as a directional aid (Never tape).	When selecting and establishing a landing zone, what guidelines should be considered?
What does it mean when an aircraft is hot?	This means the aircraft's blades are spinning.
This means the aircraft's blades are spinning.	What does it mean when an aircraft is hot?
How should you enter the landing zone is you are asked to enter?	If you do this, stay away from the tail rotor, and never approach from the rear, even if it is not running.
If you do this, stay away from the tail rotor, and never approach from the rear, even if it is not running.	How should you enter the landing zone is you are asked to enter?
What should you remember about the height of the main rotor blades?	On many aircraft, this is flexible and may dip as low as 4' off the ground, with wind sometimes pushing it down as well.
On many aircraft, this is flexible and may dip as low as 4' off the ground, with wind sometimes pushing it down as well.	What should you remember about the height of the main rotor blades?
What safety guidelines should you always follow when operating at a landing zone?	Always follow these guidelines when operating here: Do not approach the aircraft unless instructed by flight crew. Make certain that all patient care equipment is properly secured to the stretcher and that the patient is fastened as well. Smoking, open lights or flames and flares are prohibited within 50' of the aircraft.
Always follow these guidelines when operating here: Do not approach the aircraft unless instructed by flight crew. Make certain that all patient care equipment is properly secured to the stretcher and that the patient is fastened as well. Smoking, open lights or flames and flares are prohibited within 50' of the aircraft.	What safety guidelines should you always follow when operating at a landing zone?
What should you never do during a night landing?	In this situation, do not shine spotlights or flashlights in the air to help the pilot; they may temporarily blind the pilot.
In this situation, do not shine spotlights or flashlights in the air to help the pilot; they may temporarily blind the pilot.	What should you never do during a night landing?
When an aircraft has landed on uneven ground, how should you approach it?	In this situation, approach from the downhill side only.
In this situation, approach from the downhill side only.	When an aircraft has landed on uneven ground, how should you approach it?
What is the maximum limit on flight elevation for helicopters?	This is limited to 10,000' above sea level.
This is limited to 10,000' above sea level.	What is the maximum limit on flight elevation for helicopters?
How much do medivac flights typically cost compared to ambulance transport?	These cost in the range of $8,000 to $10,000, in comparison to $400 to $1,000 for ambulance transport.
These cost in the range of $8,000 to $10,000, in comparison to $400 to $1,000 for ambulance transport.	How much do medivac flights typically cost compared to ambulance transport?
How often are EMTs responsible for rescue and extrication?	Generally, these are not responsible for rescue and extrication.
Generally, these are not responsible for rescue and extrication.	How often are EMTs responsible for rescue and extrication?
What is some protective gear needed at dangerous scenes?	Some examples of this include: turnout gear, helmets, hearing protection, and fire extinguishers.
Some examples of this include: turnout gear, helmets, hearing protection, and fire extinguishers.	What is some protective gear needed at dangerous scenes?
What will you often need over your disposable gloves?	You should wear a pair of leather gloves over these if you are involved with extrication.
You should wear a pair of leather gloves over these if you are involved with extrication.	What will you often need over your disposable gloves?
What happens to bumpers following a front or rear-end collision?	"Following this, the shock absorbers within these bumpers may be compressed or ""loaded"". Avoid standing directly in front of these, as the absorbers can release and injure you."
"Following this, the shock absorbers within these bumpers may be compressed or ""loaded"". Avoid standing directly in front of these, as the absorbers can release and injure you."	What happens to bumpers following a front or rear-end collision?
What are the distances you should generally maintain around non-deployed airbags?	"Generally, maintain at least a 5"" clearance around side-impact, 10"" around driver-side, and 20"" around passenger side."
"Generally, maintain at least a 5"" clearance around side-impact, 10"" around driver-side, and 20"" around passenger side."	What are the distances you should generally maintain around non-deployed airbags?
What is the haze sometimes visible inside vehicles in which air bags have deployed?	This is cornstarch or talc used to reduce friction. It may cause a minor skin irritation, so use appropriate protective gear, including eye protection.
This is cornstarch or talc used to reduce friction. It may cause a minor skin irritation, so use appropriate protective gear, including eye protection.	What is the haze sometimes visible inside vehicles in which air bags have deployed?
What is extrication?	This is the removal from entrapment or from a dangerous situation or position.
This is the removal from entrapment or from a dangerous situation or position.	What is extrication?
What is entrapment?	This is the term used when a person is caught within a closed area with no way out or has a limb or other body part trapped.
This is the term used when a person is caught within a closed area with no way out or has a limb or other body part trapped.	What is entrapment?
What are the 10 phases of extrication?	The 10 phases of this are: 1) Preparation 2) En route to the scene 3) Arrival and scene size-up 4) Hazard control 5) Support operations 6) Gaining access 7) Emergency care 8) Removal of the patient 9) Transfer of the patient 10) Termination
The 10 phases of this are: 1) Preparation 2) En route to the scene 3) Arrival and scene size-up 4) Hazard control 5) Support operations 6) Gaining access 7) Emergency care 8) Removal of the patient 9) Transfer of the patient 10) Termination	What are the 10 phases of extrication?
What is one of the most important resonsibilities of scene size-up?	One of the most important parts of this is determining what, if any, additional resources will be needed. These may include additional EMS units and personnel, HazMat or utility departments.
One of the most important parts of this is determining what, if any, additional resources will be needed. These may include additional EMS units and personnel, HazMat or utility departments.	What is one of the most important resonsibilities of scene size-up?
During your initial 360 walk-around of a trauma scene, what should you look for?	During this, look for the following: The mechanism of injury Downed electrical lines Leaking fuels or fluid Smoke or fire Broken glass Trapped or ejected patients   Evaluate the need for additional resources such as: Extrication equipment Fire suppression Law enforcement HazMat units Utility companies Advanced life support units Aeromedical transport
During this, look for the following: The mechanism of injury Downed electrical lines Leaking fuels or fluid Smoke or fire Broken glass Trapped or ejected patients   Evaluate the need for additional resources such as: Extrication equipment Fire suppression Law enforcement HazMat units Utility companies Advanced life support units Aeromedical transport	During your initial 360 walk-around of a trauma scene, what should you look for?
What is the rescue team responsible for at the crash scene?	This is responsible for properly securing and stabilizing the vehicle, providing safe entrance and access to the patients, extricating any patients, ensuring that patients are properly protected during extrication or other rescue activities, and providing adequate room so that patients can be removed properly.
This is responsible for properly securing and stabilizing the vehicle, providing safe entrance and access to the patients, extricating any patients, ensuring that patients are properly protected during extrication or other rescue activities, and providing adequate room so that patients can be removed properly.	What is the rescue team responsible for at the crash scene?
What does SCBA stand for?	This stands for a Self-Contained Breathing Apparatus.
This stands for a Self-Contained Breathing Apparatus.	What does SCBA stand for?
Should you leave the scene of a fire as soon as the fire it out?	In this situation, do not leave the scene even after the fire is out because you may need to treat a fire fighter who has been injured during salvage and overhaul.
In this situation, do not leave the scene even after the fire is out because you may need to treat a fire fighter who has been injured during salvage and overhaul.	Should you leave the scene of a fire as soon as the fire it out?
Once you arrive at the scene of a structure fire, what should you do?	Once you do this, you should ask the incident commander where the ambulance should be staged; it is essential that the ambulance be parked far enough from the fire to be safe form the fire itself or a collapsing building.
Once you do this, you should ask the incident commander where the ambulance should be staged; it is essential that the ambulance be parked far enough from the fire to be safe form the fire itself or a collapsing building.	Once you arrive at the scene of a structure fire, what should you do?
What does FAILURE stand for?	This stands for: Failure to understand the environment or underestimating it Additional medical problems not considered Inadequate rescue skills Lack of teamwork or experience Underestimating the logistics of the incident Rescue versus recovery mode not considered Equipment not mastered
This stands for: Failure to understand the environment or underestimating it Additional medical problems not considered Inadequate rescue skills Lack of teamwork or experience Underestimating the logistics of the incident Rescue versus recovery mode not considered Equipment not mastered	What does FAILURE stand for?
What is a structure fire?	This is a fire in a house, apartment building, office, school, plant, warehouse, or other building.
This is a fire in a house, apartment building, office, school, plant, warehouse, or other building.	What is a structure fire?
In most areas, when is an ambulance dispatched with the fire department?	In most areas, this is dispatched with the fire department apparatus to any structure fire, whether or not injuries are reported.
In most areas, this is dispatched with the fire department apparatus to any structure fire, whether or not injuries are reported.	In most areas, when is an ambulance dispatched with the fire department?
What does SWAT stand for?	This stands for: Special Weapons And Tactics
This stands for: Special Weapons And Tactics	What does SWAT stand for?
What is a tactical situation?	This is a hostage, robbery, or other situation in which armed conflict is threatened or shots have been fired and the threat of violence remains.
This is a hostage, robbery, or other situation in which armed conflict is threatened or shots have been fired and the threat of violence remains.	What is a tactical situation?
What is the command post?	This is the location of the incident commander.
This is the location of the incident commander.	What is the command post?
Once you arrive at a tactical situation, what should be coordinated between the EMT team and the incident commander?	In this situation, the following information should be coordinated: Specific location information of the incident (including the street address and the side of the street. A safe location where you can meet SWAT team members should an injury occur, as well as a safe route to this point. A primary and secondary helicopter landing zone. The closest hospital, burn center, and trauma center, as well as routes to these.
In this situation, the following information should be coordinated: Specific location information of the incident (including the street address and the side of the street. A safe location where you can meet SWAT team members should an injury occur, as well as a safe route to this point. A primary and secondary helicopter landing zone. The closest hospital, burn center, and trauma center, as well as routes to these.	Once you arrive at a tactical situation, what should be coordinated between the EMT team and the incident commander?
When arriving at a tactical situation, what should you do?	When arriving here, lights and sirens should be turned off when nearing the scene, and outside radio speakers should not be used.
When arriving here, lights and sirens should be turned off when nearing the scene, and outside radio speakers should not be used.	When arriving at a tactical situation, what should you do?
How deep a trench can medical or rescue personnel enter?	At no time should medical or rescue personnel enter one of these deeper than 4' without proper shoring in place.
At no time should medical or rescue personnel enter one of these deeper than 4' without proper shoring in place.	How deep a trench can medical or rescue personnel enter?
How far back should traffic be diverted from a collapse scene?	This should be diverted 500' back from the scene.
This should be diverted 500' back from the scene.	How far back should traffic be diverted from a collapse scene?
How far back should response vehicles be parked back from a cave-in or trench collapse?	Response vehicles should be park at least 500' back from the scene of one of these incidents.
Response vehicles should be park at least 500' back from the scene of one of these incidents.	How far back should response vehicles be parked back from a cave-in or trench collapse?
Who is the only person permitted to communicate any news or progress of the search to the family?	Only the incident commander should communicate the progress of this situation.
Only the incident commander should communicate the progress of this situation.	Who is the only person permitted to communicate any news or progress of the search to the family?
As an EMT, what will your role be during a lost person search and rescue?	As an EMT, your role during one of these sitautions will be to stand by at the command post until the person or people has been found.
As an EMT, your role during one of these sitautions will be to stand by at the command post until the person or people has been found.	As an EMT, what will your role be during a lost person search and rescue?
How should you treat all downed wires?	You should treat all of these as live until you receive specific clearance otherwise.
You should treat all of these as live until you receive specific clearance otherwise.	How should you treat all downed wires?
What is a technical rescue situation?	This requires special technical skills and equipment in one of many specialized situations, such as cave-ins, rope rescues, and others.
This requires special technical skills and equipment in one of many specialized situations, such as cave-ins, rope rescues, and others.	What is a technical rescue situation?
What is a technical rescue group?	This is made up of individuals from one or more departments in a region who are trained and on call for certain types of technical rescues.
This is made up of individuals from one or more departments in a region who are trained and on call for certain types of technical rescues.	What is a technical rescue group?
Who is the incident commander?	This is the individual who has over-all command of the scene in the field.
This is the individual who has over-all command of the scene in the field.	Who is the incident commander?
What are the specialized skills need by technical rescue teams?	Some skills needed by these kinds of teams include: Cave rescue Confined space rescue Cross-field and trail rescue (park rangers) Dive rescue Lost person search and rescue Mine rescue Mountain, rock, and ice-climbing rescue Ski slope and cross-country or trail snow rescue (ski patrol) Structural collapse rescue SWAT Technical rope rescue (low- and high-angle) Trench rescue Water and small craft rescue White-water rescue
Some skills needed by these kinds of teams include: Cave rescue Confined space rescue Cross-field and trail rescue (park rangers) Dive rescue Lost person search and rescue Mine rescue Mountain, rock, and ice-climbing rescue Ski slope and cross-country or trail snow rescue (ski patrol) Structural collapse rescue SWAT Technical rope rescue (low- and high-angle) Trench rescue Water and small craft rescue White-water rescue	What are the specialized skills need by technical rescue teams?
What is termination?	This involves returning the emergency units to service.
This involves returning the emergency units to service.	What is termination?
How should you move a patient?	Move this person in a series of smooth, slow, controlled steps, with stops designated between them to allow for the repositioning and adjustment that are needed.
Move this person in a series of smooth, slow, controlled steps, with stops designated between them to allow for the repositioning and adjustment that are needed.	How should you move a patient?
What are EMS personnel responsible for at extrication scenes?	EMS personnel at these scenes are responsible for assessing and providing immediate medical care, triaging and assigning priority to patients, packaging patients, providing additional assessment and care as needed once patients are removed, and providing transport to the emergency department.
EMS personnel at these scenes are responsible for assessing and providing immediate medical care, triaging and assigning priority to patients, packaging patients, providing additional assessment and care as needed once patients are removed, and providing transport to the emergency department.	What are EMS personnel responsible for at extrication scenes?
What are law enforcement personnel responsible at an extrication scene?	These personnel are responsible for traffic control and direction, maintaining order at the scene, investigating the crash or crime scene, and establishing and maintaining lines so that bystanders are kept at a safe distance and out of the way of rescuers.
These personnel are responsible for traffic control and direction, maintaining order at the scene, investigating the crash or crime scene, and establishing and maintaining lines so that bystanders are kept at a safe distance and out of the way of rescuers.	What are law enforcement personnel responsible at an extrication scene?
What are fire fighting personnel responsible for at the extrication scene?	These personnel are responsible for extinguishing any fires, preventing further ignition, ensuring that the scene is safe, and removing any spilled fuel.
These personnel are responsible for extinguishing any fires, preventing further ignition, ensuring that the scene is safe, and removing any spilled fuel.	What are fire fighting personnel responsible for at the extrication scene?
If power lines are touching or located in proximity to a vehcile involved in a crash, what should you do?	In this situation, patient should be instructed to remain in the vehicle until power is removed.
In this situation, patient should be instructed to remain in the vehicle until power is removed.	If power lines are touching or located in proximity to a vehcile involved in a crash, what should you do?
What is the safe zone?	This is an area of protection providing safety from the hot zone.
This is an area of protection providing safety from the hot zone.	What is the safe zone?
What is the hot zone?	This is an area where individuals can be exposed to electrical hazards such as sharp metal edges, broken glass, toxic substances, lethal rays, or ignition or explosion of hazardous materials.
This is an area where individuals can be exposed to electrical hazards such as sharp metal edges, broken glass, toxic substances, lethal rays, or ignition or explosion of hazardous materials.	What is the hot zone?
How can vehicles themselves be dangerous to you?	These can be a hazard when they are on their side or roof.
These can be a hazard when they are on their side or roof.	How can vehicles themselves be dangerous to you?
What should you do prior to attempting to gain access to a vehicle involved in a crash?	"Prior to doing this, you should ensure that the vehicle is in ""park"" with the parking brake set and the ignition is turned off."
"Prior to doing this, you should ensure that the vehicle is in ""park"" with the parking brake set and the ignition is turned off."	What should you do prior to attempting to gain access to a vehicle involved in a crash?
What should you do to the battery of a car involved in a crash prior to attempting to gain access to it?	Prior to this, the battery should be disconnected, negative side first, to minimize the possibility of sparks or fire.
Prior to this, the battery should be disconnected, negative side first, to minimize the possibility of sparks or fire.	What should you do to the battery of a car involved in a crash prior to attempting to gain access to it?
Where are many batteries for alternative fuel vehicles located?	In more than 40% of these vehicles, the batteries are not located in the engine compartment.
In more than 40% of these vehicles, the batteries are not located in the engine compartment.	Where are many batteries for alternative fuel vehicles located?
Which kind of batteries have higher amperes?	Hybrid car versions of these have higher amperes than traditional.
Hybrid car versions of these have higher amperes than traditional.	Which kind of batteries have higher amperes?
What are some examples of support operations?	Some examples of these include: lighting the scene establishing tool and equipment staging areas marking helicopter landing zones
Some examples of these include: lighting the scene establishing tool and equipment staging areas marking helicopter landing zones	What are some examples of support operations?
In a multiple vehicle crash scene, what important step should you do before you proceed with any treatment and patient packaging?	Before doing any of this, you should locate and rapidly triage each patient to determine who needs urgent care.
Before doing any of this, you should locate and rapidly triage each patient to determine who needs urgent care.	In a multiple vehicle crash scene, what important step should you do before you proceed with any treatment and patient packaging?
What are some vehicle extrication techniques?	Some examples of these techniques include: Brake and gas pedal displacement Dash roll-up Door removal Roof opening and removal Seat displacement Steering column displacement Steering wheel cutting
Some examples of these techniques include: Brake and gas pedal displacement Dash roll-up Door removal Roof opening and removal Seat displacement Steering column displacement Steering wheel cutting	What are some vehicle extrication techniques?
How should you protect yourself and the patient during the removal phase?	During this phase, both you and the patient should be covered by a thick, fire-resistant canvas or blanket for protection from broken glass and other hazards. It is also often noisy, so hearing protection is also essential.
During this phase, both you and the patient should be covered by a thick, fire-resistant canvas or blanket for protection from broken glass and other hazards. It is also often noisy, so hearing protection is also essential.	How should you protect yourself and the patient during the removal phase?
What is disentanglement?	This, also called extrication, involves the removal of the patient from a dangerous situation or position.
This, also called extrication, involves the removal of the patient from a dangerous situation or position.	What is disentanglement?
Who is responsible for the assessment and care of the patient at an extrication scene?	The team leader, customarily the senior medical person is responsible for this.
The team leader, customarily the senior medical person is responsible for this.	Who is responsible for the assessment and care of the patient at an extrication scene?
What is complex access?	This requires the use of special tools, such as hand, pneumatic, and hydraulic devices, and special training that includes breaking windows or other means of forcible entry.
This requires the use of special tools, such as hand, pneumatic, and hydraulic devices, and special training that includes breaking windows or other means of forcible entry.	What is complex access?
Once entrance and access to the patient have been provided, and unless there is an immediate threat of fire, explosion or other danger, what should you do?	In this situation at this time, you should perform a primary assessment and provide care before further extrication begins, as follows: 1) Provide manual stabilization 2) Open the airway 3) Provide high-flow oxygen 4) Assist or provide for adequate ventilation 5) Control any significant external bleeding 6) Treat all critical injuries
In this situation at this time, you should perform a primary assessment and provide care before further extrication begins, as follows: 1) Provide manual stabilization 2) Open the airway 3) Provide high-flow oxygen 4) Assist or provide for adequate ventilation 5) Control any significant external bleeding 6) Treat all critical injuries	Once entrance and access to the patient have been provided, and unless there is an immediate threat of fire, explosion or other danger, what should you do?
What is simple access?	This is getting to the patient as quickly and simply as possible without using any tools or breaking any glass.
This is getting to the patient as quickly and simply as possible without using any tools or breaking any glass.	What is simple access?
What tools should be available for use to gain access to the patient when delayed access could be life-threatening and the rescue team has not arrived?	In this situation, simple hand tools, such as hammers, center punches, pry bars, and hacksaws should be available on the ambulance.
In this situation, simple hand tools, such as hammers, center punches, pry bars, and hacksaws should be available on the ambulance.	What tools should be available for use to gain access to the patient when delayed access could be life-threatening and the rescue team has not arrived?
What should you always do with the patient during extrication?	During this, remember to always talk to the patient and describe what you are going to do before you do it and as you are doing it, even if you think the patient is unconscious.
During this, remember to always talk to the patient and describe what you are going to do before you do it and as you are doing it, even if you think the patient is unconscious.	What should you always do with the patient during extrication?
In what common position is CPR NOT effective?	This is not effective when the patient is in a sitting position or lying on the soft seat of a vehicle. You may have to use the rapid extrication technique to move the patient.
This is not effective when the patient is in a sitting position or lying on the soft seat of a vehicle. You may have to use the rapid extrication technique to move the patient.	In what common position is CPR NOT effective?
What is a seizure?	This is a temporary alteration in consciousness.
This is a temporary alteration in consciousness.	What is a seizure?
What is a generalized seizure?	This is typically characterized by unconsciousness and a generalized severe twitching of all of the body's muscles that lasts several minutes or more. It results from abnormal discharges from large areas of the brain, usually involving both hemispheres.
This is typically characterized by unconsciousness and a generalized severe twitching of all of the body's muscles that lasts several minutes or more. It results from abnormal discharges from large areas of the brain, usually involving both hemispheres.	What is a generalized seizure?
What is an absence seizure?	This is characterized by a brief lapse of consciousness in which the patient seems to stare and not to respond to anyone. It was formerly called a petit mal.
This is characterized by a brief lapse of consciousness in which the patient seems to stare and not to respond to anyone. It was formerly called a petit mal.	What is an absence seizure?
What is a partial seizure?	This begins in one part of the brain and is classified as simple or complex.
This begins in one part of the brain and is classified as simple or complex.	What is a partial seizure?
What is a simple partial seizure?	In this, there is no change in the patient's level of consciousness. Patients may complain of numbness, weakness, or dizziness. They may report visual changes and unusual smells or tastes. Twitching of extremities and brief paralysis are also possible.
In this, there is no change in the patient's level of consciousness. Patients may complain of numbness, weakness, or dizziness. They may report visual changes and unusual smells or tastes. Twitching of extremities and brief paralysis are also possible.	What is a simple partial seizure?
What is a complex partial seizure?	In this, the patient has an AMS. This results from abnormal discharges from the temporal lobe of the brain. Other characteristics may be lip smacking, eye blinking, isolated convulsions. Unpleasant smells, visual halluncinations, uncontrollable fear, repetitive physical behavior are also possible.
In this, the patient has an AMS. This results from abnormal discharges from the temporal lobe of the brain. Other characteristics may be lip smacking, eye blinking, isolated convulsions. Unpleasant smells, visual halluncinations, uncontrollable fear, repetitive physical behavior are also possible.	What is a complex partial seizure?
What is an aura?	This is something a patient may experience prior to an seizure as a warning.
This is something a patient may experience prior to an seizure as a warning.	What is an aura?
What is a tonic phase?	This may occur right before a seizure, usually lasting only a few seconds, and involves constant muscle contraction and trembling, tongue biting, and bladder and/or bowel incontinence.
This may occur right before a seizure, usually lasting only a few seconds, and involves constant muscle contraction and trembling, tongue biting, and bladder and/or bowel incontinence.	What is a tonic phase?
What is a tonic-clonic seizure?	In this, the patient may exhibit bilateral movement characterized by muscle rigidity and relaxation usually lasting 1 to 3 minutes. During this, the patient exhibits tachycardia, hyperventilation, sweating, and intense salivation.
In this, the patient may exhibit bilateral movement characterized by muscle rigidity and relaxation usually lasting 1 to 3 minutes. During this, the patient exhibits tachycardia, hyperventilation, sweating, and intense salivation.	What is a tonic-clonic seizure?
How long do most seizures last?	These usually last 3 to five minutes.
These usually last 3 to five minutes.	How long do most seizures last?
What is a postictal state?	This is a lengthy period (5 to 30 minutes) immediately following a seizure. The patient gradually regains consciousness, and the state is over when the patient regains a complete return of his or her normal level of consciousness.
This is a lengthy period (5 to 30 minutes) immediately following a seizure. The patient gradually regains consciousness, and the state is over when the patient regains a complete return of his or her normal level of consciousness.	What is a postictal state?
What is status epilepticus?	This condition is when seizures continue every few minutes without the person regaining consciousness or last longer than 30 minutes.
This condition is when seizures continue every few minutes without the person regaining consciousness or last longer than 30 minutes.	What is status epilepticus?
What are some causes of seizures?	These include high fever, structural problems in the brain, or metabolic or chemical problems in the body.
These include high fever, structural problems in the brain, or metabolic or chemical problems in the body.	What are some causes of seizures?
What are some medications for controlling seizures?	Some examples of these medications are phenytoin (Dilantin), phenobarbital, or carbamazepine (Tegretol).
Some examples of these medications are phenytoin (Dilantin), phenobarbital, or carbamazepine (Tegretol).	What are some medications for controlling seizures?
What is a cause of epileptic seizures?	One cause of these is congenital.
One cause of these is congenital.	What is a cause of epileptic seizures?
What are some causes of structural seizures?	Some causes of these include: Tumors, infections, scar tissue from injury, head trauma, and strokes.
Some causes of these include: Tumors, infections, scar tissue from injury, head trauma, and strokes.	What are some causes of structural seizures?
What are some causes of metabolic seizures?	Some causes of these include: Hypoxia, abnormal blood chemical values, hypoglycemia, poisoning, drug overdose, and sudden withdrawal from alcohol or medications.
Some causes of these include: Hypoxia, abnormal blood chemical values, hypoglycemia, poisoning, drug overdose, and sudden withdrawal from alcohol or medications.	What are some causes of metabolic seizures?
What is a cause of febrile seizures?	This is caused by a sudden high fever. They are generally well tolerated by children, but transport to a hospital is necessary.
This is caused by a sudden high fever. They are generally well tolerated by children, but transport to a hospital is necessary.	What is a cause of febrile seizures?
What is a result of the constant muscle contraction during a seizure?	A result of this is that the muscles use a lot of oxygen. There is therefore a buildup of acids in the bloodstream, and the patient may turn cyanotic from lack of oxygen.
A result of this is that the muscles use a lot of oxygen. There is therefore a buildup of acids in the bloodstream, and the patient may turn cyanotic from lack of oxygen.	What is a result of the constant muscle contraction during a seizure?
What might a seizure cause in a diabetic patient?	In these kinds of patients, the blood glucose value may drop because of excessive muscular contraction of a seizure.
In these kinds of patients, the blood glucose value may drop because of excessive muscular contraction of a seizure.	What might a seizure cause in a diabetic patient?
What is one clue that an unconscious or confused patient may have had a seizure?	One clue that an unconscious or confused patient may have had one of these is to find that they were incontinent.
One clue that an unconscious or confused patient may have had one of these is to find that they were incontinent.	What is one clue that an unconscious or confused patient may have had a seizure?
What happens during the postictal state?	During this state, muscles become flaccid, breathing becomes labored in an attempt to compensate for the buildup of acids in the bloodstream.
During this state, muscles become flaccid, breathing becomes labored in an attempt to compensate for the buildup of acids in the bloodstream.	What happens during the postictal state?
What is hemiparesis?	This is weakness on one side of the body, resembling a stroke.
This is weakness on one side of the body, resembling a stroke.	What is hemiparesis?
What is one way to differentiate between a patient who has had a stroke, and a hypoglycemic patient?	One way to differentiate between these two kinds of patients is: A patient who has had a stroke may be alert and attempting to communicate normally, whereas a patient with hypoglycemia almost always has an altered or decreased level of consciousness.
One way to differentiate between these two kinds of patients is: A patient who has had a stroke may be alert and attempting to communicate normally, whereas a patient with hypoglycemia almost always has an altered or decreased level of consciousness.	What is one way to differentiate between a patient who has had a stroke, and a hypoglycemic patient?
When should you especially consider hypoglycemia in a patient who has had a seizure?	You should especially consider this in the seizure patient if they have a history of diabetes.
You should especially consider this in the seizure patient if they have a history of diabetes.	When should you especially consider hypoglycemia in a patient who has had a seizure?
Is AMS a symptom or a disease?	Remember this is a symptom, not a disease.
Remember this is a symptom, not a disease.	Is AMS a symptom or a disease?
What are the Tips of the Vowels (for reviewing possible causes of AMS)?	T Trauma I Infection P Psychogenic causes S Seizure / Syncope   A Alcohol E Electrolytes I Insulin O Opiates U Uremia (Toxic condition from kidney disease)
T Trauma I Infection P Psychogenic causes S Seizure / Syncope   A Alcohol E Electrolytes I Insulin O Opiates U Uremia (Toxic condition from kidney disease)	What are the Tips of the Vowels (for reviewing possible causes of AMS)?
What is the optimal treatment window for stroke victims?	The optimal treatment for this kind of patient is 3 hours.
The optimal treatment for this kind of patient is 3 hours.	What is the optimal treatment window for stroke victims?
What does CT stand for?	This stands for computed tomography, and blood is easy to see on these scans.
This stands for computed tomography, and blood is easy to see on these scans.	What does CT stand for?
"Why is it important to recognize a patient as a ""stroke alert"" and warn the hospital staff ASAP?"	This is important because most hospitals do not have CT technicians available 24 hours a day.
This is important because most hospitals do not have CT technicians available 24 hours a day.	"Why is it important to recognize a patient as a ""stroke alert"" and warn the hospital staff ASAP?"
In the Glasgow coma scale, what are the 4 levels of eye opening?	They are: 4 Spontaneous 3 In reponse to speech 2 In reponse to pain 1 None
They are: 4 Spontaneous 3 In reponse to speech 2 In reponse to pain 1 None	In the Glasgow coma scale, what are the 4 levels of eye opening?
In the Glasgow coma scale, what are the 4 levels of verbal response?	5 Oriented conversation 4 Confused conversation 3 Inappropriate words 2 Incomprehensible sounds 1 None
5 Oriented conversation 4 Confused conversation 3 Inappropriate words 2 Incomprehensible sounds 1 None	In the Glasgow coma scale, what are the 4 levels of verbal response?
In the Glasgow coma scale, what are the 4 levels of motor response?	6 Obeys commands 5 Localizes pain 4 Withdraws to pain 3 Abnormal flexion 2 Abnormal extension 1 None
6 Obeys commands 5 Localizes pain 4 Withdraws to pain 3 Abnormal flexion 2 Abnormal extension 1 None	In the Glasgow coma scale, what are the 4 levels of motor response?
In the Cincinnati Prehospital Stroke Scale, what are the normal and abnormal results of the facial droop test (ask patient to show teeth or smile)?	Normal: Both sides of face move easily well.   Abnormal: One side of the face does not move as well as other.
Normal: Both sides of face move easily well.   Abnormal: One side of the face does not move as well as other.	In the Cincinnati Prehospital Stroke Scale, what are the normal and abnormal results of the facial droop test (ask patient to show teeth or smile)?
In the Cincinnati Prehospital Stroke Scale, what are the normal and abnormal results of the arm drift test (ask patient to close eyes and hold both arms out with palms up)?	Normal: Both arms move the same, or both arms do not move.   Abnormal: One arm does not move, or one arm drifts down compared with the other side.
Normal: Both arms move the same, or both arms do not move.   Abnormal: One arm does not move, or one arm drifts down compared with the other side.	In the Cincinnati Prehospital Stroke Scale, what are the normal and abnormal results of the arm drift test (ask patient to close eyes and hold both arms out with palms up)?
"In the Cincinnati Prehospital Stroke Scale, what are the normal and abnormal results of the speech test (ask patient to say ""the sky is blue in Cincinnati)?"	Normal: Patient uses correct words with no slurring.   Abnormal: Patient slurs words, uses inappropriate words, or is unable to speak.
Normal: Patient uses correct words with no slurring.   Abnormal: Patient slurs words, uses inappropriate words, or is unable to speak.	"In the Cincinnati Prehospital Stroke Scale, what are the normal and abnormal results of the speech test (ask patient to say ""the sky is blue in Cincinnati)?"
According to the American Heart Association, how many Americans died of cardiovascular disease in 2005?	864,480 Americans died of this disease in 2005.
864,480 Americans died of this disease in 2005.	According to the American Heart Association, how many Americans died of cardiovascular disease in 2005?
What percentage of deaths in America is caused by cardiovascular disease?	35.5% of all deaths in America is caused by this.
35.5% of all deaths in America is caused by this.	What percentage of deaths in America is caused by cardiovascular disease?
What divides the heart down the middle?	It is divided by a wall called the septum.
It is divided by a wall called the septum.	What divides the heart down the middle?
What is the atrium?	This is the upper chamber of the heart that receives incoming blood.
This is the upper chamber of the heart that receives incoming blood.	What is the atrium?
What is the ventricle?	This is the lower chamber of the heart, and pumps out the outgoing blood.
This is the lower chamber of the heart, and pumps out the outgoing blood.	What is the ventricle?
What is the aorta?	This is the body's main artery, and it receives the blood ejected from the left ventricle and delivers it to all the other arteries.
This is the body's main artery, and it receives the blood ejected from the left ventricle and delivers it to all the other arteries.	What is the aorta?
What does the right side of the heart do?	This side of the heart receives deoxygenated blood from the veins of the body, through the vena cava. After contraction of the ventricle on this side, blood flows into the pulmonary artery where the blood is oxygenated.
This side of the heart receives deoxygenated blood from the veins of the body, through the vena cava. After contraction of the ventricle on this side, blood flows into the pulmonary artery where the blood is oxygenated.	What does the right side of the heart do?
How does the oxygenated blood return to the heart?	This returns to the heart through the pulmonary veins to the left side of the heart.
This returns to the heart through the pulmonary veins to the left side of the heart.	How does the oxygenated blood return to the heart?
Why is the left side of the heart more muscular than the right?	This side is more muscular because it has to pump blood into the aorta and all other arteries of the body.
This side is more muscular because it has to pump blood into the aorta and all other arteries of the body.	Why is the left side of the heart more muscular than the right?
What is automaticity?	This is a special characteristic foubd in cardiac muscle cells. It allows a cardiac muscle cell to contract spontaneously without stimulus from a nerve-source.
This is a special characteristic foubd in cardiac muscle cells. It allows a cardiac muscle cell to contract spontaneously without stimulus from a nerve-source.	What is automaticity?
What is the autonomic nervous system?	This is the part of the brain that controls the functions of the body that do not require conscious thought, such as the heartbeat, respirations, dilation and constriction of blood vessels, and digestion of food. It has two parts: The sympathetic nervous system and the parasympathetic nervous system.
This is the part of the brain that controls the functions of the body that do not require conscious thought, such as the heartbeat, respirations, dilation and constriction of blood vessels, and digestion of food. It has two parts: The sympathetic nervous system and the parasympathetic nervous system.	What is the autonomic nervous system?
What does the sympathetic nervous system do?	This speeds up the heart rate, increases respiratory rate and depth, dilates blood vessels in the muscle, and constricts blood vessels in the digestive system.
This speeds up the heart rate, increases respiratory rate and depth, dilates blood vessels in the muscle, and constricts blood vessels in the digestive system.	What does the sympathetic nervous system do?
What does the parasympathetic nervous system do?	This directly opposes the other system, it slows the heart and respiratory rates, constricts blood vessels in the muscles, and dilates blood vessels in the digestive system.
This directly opposes the other system, it slows the heart and respiratory rates, constricts blood vessels in the muscles, and dilates blood vessels in the digestive system.	What does the parasympathetic nervous system do?
What is the mycardium?	This is heart muscle, and must have a continuous supple of oxygen and nutrients.
This is heart muscle, and must have a continuous supple of oxygen and nutrients.	What is the mycardium?
What is stroke volume?	This is the volume of blood ejected with each ventricular contraction.
This is the volume of blood ejected with each ventricular contraction.	What is stroke volume?
What are coronary arteries?	These are blood vessels that supply blood to the heart muscle.
These are blood vessels that supply blood to the heart muscle.	What are coronary arteries?
What is occlusion?	This is another term for blockage.
This is another term for blockage.	What is occlusion?
What is lumen?	This is the inside diameter of the artery. It narrows as a person ages.
This is the inside diameter of the artery. It narrows as a person ages.	What is lumen?
Where can the posterior tibial pulse be felt?	This can be felt on the inside of the ankle.
This can be felt on the inside of the ankle.	Where can the posterior tibial pulse be felt?
Where can the dorsalis pedis pulse be felt?	This can be felt at the top of the foot.
This can be felt at the top of the foot.	Where can the dorsalis pedis pulse be felt?
Where can the brachial pulse be felt?	This can be felt on the inside of the upper arm.
This can be felt on the inside of the upper arm.	Where can the brachial pulse be felt?
What is a thromboembolism?	This is a blood clot that is floating through blood vessels until it reaches an area too narrow for it to pass.
This is a blood clot that is floating through blood vessels until it reaches an area too narrow for it to pass.	What is a thromboembolism?
What is an acute myocardial infarction (AMI)?	This is a blockage that occurs in a coronary artery, and is also known as a heart attack.
This is a blockage that occurs in a coronary artery, and is also known as a heart attack.	What is an acute myocardial infarction (AMI)?
What is cardiac arrest?	This is the complete stopage of the heart, caused by infarction, or death of heart tissue. It is determined by the absence of a palpable pulse at the carotid artery.
This is the complete stopage of the heart, caused by infarction, or death of heart tissue. It is determined by the absence of a palpable pulse at the carotid artery.	What is cardiac arrest?
What is acute coronary syndrome (ACS)?	This describes a group of symptoms caused by myocardial ischemia, or a decrease blood flow to the heart, which leads to chest pain.
This describes a group of symptoms caused by myocardial ischemia, or a decrease blood flow to the heart, which leads to chest pain.	What is acute coronary syndrome (ACS)?
What is angina pectoris?	This is when, for a brief time, heart tissues are not getting enough oxygen. It is often a symptom of atherosclerotic coronary artery disease.
This is when, for a brief time, heart tissues are not getting enough oxygen. It is often a symptom of atherosclerotic coronary artery disease.	What is angina pectoris?
Why is fast action so critical in treating an A.M.I. (A.K.A. a heart attack)?	Fast action is critical in treating this because once dead, heart muscle tissue cannot be revived. Instead, they turn into scar tissue and become a burden to the beating heart.
Fast action is critical in treating this because once dead, heart muscle tissue cannot be revived. Instead, they turn into scar tissue and become a burden to the beating heart.	Why is fast action so critical in treating an A.M.I. (A.K.A. a heart attack)?
What is the timeline for an AMI?	During this, 30 minutes after blood flow is cut off, some cells begin to die. After 2 hours, as many as half. After 4-6, more than 90%.
During this, 30 minutes after blood flow is cut off, some cells begin to die. After 2 hours, as many as half. After 4-6, more than 90%.	What is the timeline for an AMI?
What are the signs and symptoms of AMI?	Signs and symptoms of this include: Sudden onset fo weakness, nausea, and sweating without an obvious cause. Chest pain, discomfort, or pressure that is often crushing or squeezing and that does not change with each breath. Pain, discomfort, or pressure in the lower jaw, arms, back, abdomen, or neck. Irregular heartbeat and syncope. Shortness of breath, or dyspnea Pink, frothy sputum Sudden death
Signs and symptoms of this include: Sudden onset fo weakness, nausea, and sweating without an obvious cause. Chest pain, discomfort, or pressure that is often crushing or squeezing and that does not change with each breath. Pain, discomfort, or pressure in the lower jaw, arms, back, abdomen, or neck. Irregular heartbeat and syncope. Shortness of breath, or dyspnea Pink, frothy sputum Sudden death	What are the signs and symptoms of AMI?
How is the pain of an AMI different from the pain of angina?	It is different from angina in three ways: It can occur during exercise OR when a person is sitting quietly or even sleeping. It does not resolve in a few minutes; rather, it can last between 30 minutes and several hours. It may or may not be relieved by rest or nitroglycerin.
It is different from angina in three ways: It can occur during exercise OR when a person is sitting quietly or even sleeping. It does not resolve in a few minutes; rather, it can last between 30 minutes and several hours. It may or may not be relieved by rest or nitroglycerin.	How is the pain of an AMI different from the pain of angina?
What are the physical findings of AMI?	These are: Nausea, vomiting, sweating, pale skin, possible cyanosis, irregular or even a slowing of the pulse, bradycardia if the inferior portion of the heart has been damaged, difficulty breathing, and an impending sense of doom.
These are: Nausea, vomiting, sweating, pale skin, possible cyanosis, irregular or even a slowing of the pulse, bradycardia if the inferior portion of the heart has been damaged, difficulty breathing, and an impending sense of doom.	What are the physical findings of AMI?
What is an arrhythmia?	This is an abnormality of heart rhythm, whereby the heart is using up energy without pumping any blood. It is also known as ventricular fibrillation.
This is an abnormality of heart rhythm, whereby the heart is using up energy without pumping any blood. It is also known as ventricular fibrillation.	What is an arrhythmia?
What is tachycardia?	This is rapid beating of the heart, 100 BPM or higher.
This is rapid beating of the heart, 100 BPM or higher.	What is tachycardia?
What is bradycardia?	This is unusually slow beating of the heart, 60 BPM or less.
This is unusually slow beating of the heart, 60 BPM or less.	What is bradycardia?
What is ventricular tachycardia?	This occurs when electrical activity starts in the ventricle instead of the atrium, causing a rapid heart rate of 150-200 BPM. Blood pressure falls, pulse drops, and may deteriorate into ventricular defibrillation.
This occurs when electrical activity starts in the ventricle instead of the atrium, causing a rapid heart rate of 150-200 BPM. Blood pressure falls, pulse drops, and may deteriorate into ventricular defibrillation.	What is ventricular tachycardia?
What is congestive heart failure (CHF)?	This is when the ventricular heart muscle is so damaged that it can no longer keep up with the return flow of blood from the atria. Blood backs up in the pulmonary veins, increasing pressure in the capillaries of the lungs and forcing water into the alveoli, causing pulmonary edema.
This is when the ventricular heart muscle is so damaged that it can no longer keep up with the return flow of blood from the atria. Blood backs up in the pulmonary veins, increasing pressure in the capillaries of the lungs and forcing water into the alveoli, causing pulmonary edema.	What is congestive heart failure (CHF)?
What is dependent edema?	This is the collection of fluid in the part of the body that is closest to the ground.
This is the collection of fluid in the part of the body that is closest to the ground.	What is dependent edema?
What is a hypertensive emergency?	This is when the systolic pressure is greater than 160 mm Hg.
This is when the systolic pressure is greater than 160 mm Hg.	What is a hypertensive emergency?
What is an aortic aneurysm?	This is a weakness in the wall of the aorta, making it susceptible to rupture.
This is a weakness in the wall of the aorta, making it susceptible to rupture.	What is an aortic aneurysm?
What is a dissecting aneurysm?	This occurs when the inner layers of the aorta become separated, allowing blood to flow between the layers.
This occurs when the inner layers of the aorta become separated, allowing blood to flow between the layers.	What is a dissecting aneurysm?
What is special consideration for atheltic patients?	These patients tend to have slower heart rates at rest.
These patients tend to have slower heart rates at rest.	What is special consideration for atheltic patients?
What is the difference between AMI and dissecting aneurysm regarding the onset of pain?	The difference between the two is: AMI: Gradual, with additional symptoms. Dissecting Aneurysm: Abrupt, without additional sympoms.
The difference between the two is: AMI: Gradual, with additional symptoms. Dissecting Aneurysm: Abrupt, without additional sympoms.	What is the difference between AMI and dissecting aneurysm regarding the onset of pain?
What is the difference between AMI and dissecting aneurysm regarding the quality of pain?	The difference is: AMI: Tightness or pressure Dissecting aneurysm: Sharp or Tearing
The difference is: AMI: Tightness or pressure Dissecting aneurysm: Sharp or Tearing	What is the difference between AMI and dissecting aneurysm regarding the quality of pain?
What is the difference between AMI and dissecting aneurysm regarding the severity of pain?	The difference is: AMI: Increases with time Dissecting aneurysm: Maximal from the outset
The difference is: AMI: Increases with time Dissecting aneurysm: Maximal from the outset	What is the difference between AMI and dissecting aneurysm regarding the severity of pain?
What is the difference between AMI and dissecting aneurysm regarding the timing of pain?	The difference is: AMI: May wax and wane Dissecting Aneurysm: Does not abate once it has started
The difference is: AMI: May wax and wane Dissecting Aneurysm: Does not abate once it has started	What is the difference between AMI and dissecting aneurysm regarding the timing of pain?
What is the difference between AMI and dissecting aneurysm regarding the region/radiation of pain?	The difference is: AMI: Substernal; back rarely involved Dissecting Aneurysm: Back possibly involved, between the shoulder blades
The difference is: AMI: Substernal; back rarely involved Dissecting Aneurysm: Back possibly involved, between the shoulder blades	What is the difference between AMI and dissecting aneurysm regarding the region/radiation of pain?
What is the difference between AMI and dissecting aneurysm regarding clinical signs?	The difference is: AMI: Peripheral pulses equal Dissecting Aneurysm: Blood pressure discrepancy between arms or decrease in femoral or carotid pulse.
The difference is: AMI: Peripheral pulses equal Dissecting Aneurysm: Blood pressure discrepancy between arms or decrease in femoral or carotid pulse.	What is the difference between AMI and dissecting aneurysm regarding clinical signs?
What is dyspnea?	This is when a patient reports feeling short of breath or has difficulty breathing.
This is when a patient reports feeling short of breath or has difficulty breathing.	What is dyspnea?
What structures make up the upper airway?	This consists of the nose, mouth, jaw, oral cavity, pharynx, and larynx.
This consists of the nose, mouth, jaw, oral cavity, pharynx, and larynx.	What structures make up the upper airway?
What divides the upper and lower airway?	These are divided by the larnyx.
These are divided by the larnyx.	What divides the upper and lower airway?
What is carbon dioxide retention?	This is the failure of the respiratory center in the brain to respond normally to a rise in arterial levels of carbon dioxide.
This is the failure of the respiratory center in the brain to respond normally to a rise in arterial levels of carbon dioxide.	What is carbon dioxide retention?
What is the hypoxic drive?	This is a secondary drive which stimulates the respiratory center.
This is a secondary drive which stimulates the respiratory center.	What is the hypoxic drive?
What is the normal breathing rate of an adult patient?	This is 12-20 BPM.
This is 12-20 BPM.	What is the normal breathing rate of an adult patient?
What are the signs and symptoms of asthma?	Signs and symptoms of this include: Wheezing on inspiration / expiration Bronchospasm
Signs and symptoms of this include: Wheezing on inspiration / expiration Bronchospasm	What are the signs and symptoms of asthma?
What are the signs and symptoms of anaphylaxis?	Signs and symptoms include: Flushed skin or hives Generalized edema Decreased blood pressure Laryngeal edema with dyspnea
Signs and symptoms include: Flushed skin or hives Generalized edema Decreased blood pressure Laryngeal edema with dyspnea	What are the signs and symptoms of anaphylaxis?
What are the signs and symptoms of bronchitis?	Signs and symptoms include: Chronic cough Wheezing Cyanosis Productive cough
Signs and symptoms include: Chronic cough Wheezing Cyanosis Productive cough	What are the signs and symptoms of bronchitis?
What are the signs and symptoms of congestive heart failure?	Signs and symptoms include: Dependent edema Rales Paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea
Signs and symptoms include: Dependent edema Rales Paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea	What are the signs and symptoms of congestive heart failure?
What are the signs and symptoms of croup?	Signs and symptoms include: Fever Barking cough Mostly seen in pediatric patients
Signs and symptoms include: Fever Barking cough Mostly seen in pediatric patients	What are the signs and symptoms of croup?
What are the signs and symptoms of emphysema?	Signs and symptoms include: Barrel chest Pursed lip breathing Dyspnea on exertion
Signs and symptoms include: Barrel chest Pursed lip breathing Dyspnea on exertion	What are the signs and symptoms of emphysema?
What are the signs and symptoms of pneumonia?	Signs and symptoms include: Dyspnea Chills, fever Cough Dark sputum
Signs and symptoms include: Dyspnea Chills, fever Cough Dark sputum	What are the signs and symptoms of pneumonia?
What are the signs and symptoms of pneumothorax?	Signs and symptoms include: Sudden chest pain with dyspnea Decreased lung sounds/affected side
Signs and symptoms include: Sudden chest pain with dyspnea Decreased lung sounds/affected side	What are the signs and symptoms of pneumothorax?
What are the signs and symptoms of pulmonary embolism?	Signs and symptoms include: Sharp, pinpoint pain Dyspnea Sudden onset After childbirth or surgery
Signs and symptoms include: Sharp, pinpoint pain Dyspnea Sudden onset After childbirth or surgery	What are the signs and symptoms of pulmonary embolism?
What are the signs and symptoms of tension pneumothorax?	Signs and symptoms include: Progressive shortness of breath Increasing altered level of consciousness Neck vein distention Tracheal deviation
Signs and symptoms include: Progressive shortness of breath Increasing altered level of consciousness Neck vein distention Tracheal deviation	What are the signs and symptoms of tension pneumothorax?
What are the signs and symptoms of pertussis?	"Signs and symptoms include: Coughing spells ""Whooping"" sound Fever Mostly seen in pediatric patients"
"Signs and symptoms include: Coughing spells ""Whooping"" sound Fever Mostly seen in pediatric patients"	What are the signs and symptoms of pertussis?
As you treat patients with disorders of the lungs, what situations should you be aware of?	While treating these kinds of patients, be aware of these situations: Gas exchange between alveoli and pulmonary circulation is obstructed by fluid in the lung, infection, or collapsed alveoli (atelectasis) The alveoli are damaged and cannot transport gases properly across their own walls The air passages are obstructed by muscle spasm, mucus, or weakened floppy airway walls Blood flow to the lungs is obstructed by blood clots The pleural space is filled with air or excess fluid, so the lungs cannot properly expand
While treating these kinds of patients, be aware of these situations: Gas exchange between alveoli and pulmonary circulation is obstructed by fluid in the lung, infection, or collapsed alveoli (atelectasis) The alveoli are damaged and cannot transport gases properly across their own walls The air passages are obstructed by muscle spasm, mucus, or weakened floppy airway walls Blood flow to the lungs is obstructed by blood clots The pleural space is filled with air or excess fluid, so the lungs cannot properly expand	As you treat patients with disorders of the lungs, what situations should you be aware of?
What is atelectasis?	This is the collapse of the alveolar space in the lungs.
This is the collapse of the alveolar space in the lungs.	What is atelectasis?
What are the characteristics of bronchitis?	Characteristics of this are: An acute or chronic inflammation of the air passages (bronchi and bronchioles) often due to infection, usually associated with productive cough, and usually presents without fever Accumulation of fluid within the air passages, as well as swelling of the walls, resticts air flow and may lead to signs of asthma such as wheezing. It is often associated with rhonchi. Crackles are not usually present unless pneumonia has developed. The breathing pattern in bronchitis does not indicate major airway obstruction, but the patient may experience tachypnea, an increase in the breathing rate, which is an attempt to compensate for the reduced amount of normal lung tissue and for the buildup of fluid.
Characteristics of this are: An acute or chronic inflammation of the air passages (bronchi and bronchioles) often due to infection, usually associated with productive cough, and usually presents without fever Accumulation of fluid within the air passages, as well as swelling of the walls, resticts air flow and may lead to signs of asthma such as wheezing. It is often associated with rhonchi. Crackles are not usually present unless pneumonia has developed. The breathing pattern in bronchitis does not indicate major airway obstruction, but the patient may experience tachypnea, an increase in the breathing rate, which is an attempt to compensate for the reduced amount of normal lung tissue and for the buildup of fluid.	What are the characteristics of bronchitis?
What are the characteristics of the common cold?	Characteristics of this are: A viral infection usually associated with swollen nasal mucous membranes and the production of fluid from the sinuses and nose. Dyspnea is not severe; patients complain of stuffiness of difficulty breathing through the nose.
Characteristics of this are: A viral infection usually associated with swollen nasal mucous membranes and the production of fluid from the sinuses and nose. Dyspnea is not severe; patients complain of stuffiness of difficulty breathing through the nose.	What are the characteristics of the common cold?
What are the characteristics of TB?	Characteristics of this are: A disease that can lay dormant in a person's lungs for decades, then reactivate. Dangerous because many TB strains are resistant to many antibiotics. Spread by cough. Droplet nuclei can remain intact for decades. Use a high-efficiency air particulate, or HEPA, respirator.
Characteristics of this are: A disease that can lay dormant in a person's lungs for decades, then reactivate. Dangerous because many TB strains are resistant to many antibiotics. Spread by cough. Droplet nuclei can remain intact for decades. Use a high-efficiency air particulate, or HEPA, respirator.	What are the characteristics of TB?
What are the characteristics of diphtheria?	Characteristics of this are: Highly contagious and serious when it occurs The formation of diphtheritic membrane lining the pharynx that is composed of debris, inflammatory cells, and mucus. This membrane can rapidly and severely obstruct the passage of air into the larynx.
Characteristics of this are: Highly contagious and serious when it occurs The formation of diphtheritic membrane lining the pharynx that is composed of debris, inflammatory cells, and mucus. This membrane can rapidly and severely obstruct the passage of air into the larynx.	What are the characteristics of diphtheria?
What are the characteristics of pneumonia?	Characteristics of this are: An acute bacterial or viral infection of the lung that damages lung tissue, usually associated with fever, cough, and production of sputum. Fluid also accumulates in the surrounding normal lung tissue, separating the alveoli from their capillaries (fluid can also accumulate in the pleural space). The lung's ability to exchange oxygen and carbon dioxide is impaired The breathing pattern in pneumonia does not indicate major airway obstruction, but the patient may experience tachypnea, an increase in the breathing rate, which is an attempt to compensate for the reduced amount of normal lung tissue and for the buildup of fluid.
Characteristics of this are: An acute bacterial or viral infection of the lung that damages lung tissue, usually associated with fever, cough, and production of sputum. Fluid also accumulates in the surrounding normal lung tissue, separating the alveoli from their capillaries (fluid can also accumulate in the pleural space). The lung's ability to exchange oxygen and carbon dioxide is impaired The breathing pattern in pneumonia does not indicate major airway obstruction, but the patient may experience tachypnea, an increase in the breathing rate, which is an attempt to compensate for the reduced amount of normal lung tissue and for the buildup of fluid.	What are the characteristics of pneumonia?
What are the characteristics of epiglottitis?	Characteristics of this are: An inflammation of the epiglottis due to bacterial infection that can produce severe swelling of the flap over the larynx. Can swell to two or three times its normal size, especially in young children. The airway may become almost completely obstructed, sometimes quite suddenly. Stridor (harsh, high-pitched, continued rough, barking inspiratory sounds) may be heard late in the development of airway obstruction. Characterized in adults by a severe sore throat.
Characteristics of this are: An inflammation of the epiglottis due to bacterial infection that can produce severe swelling of the flap over the larynx. Can swell to two or three times its normal size, especially in young children. The airway may become almost completely obstructed, sometimes quite suddenly. Stridor (harsh, high-pitched, continued rough, barking inspiratory sounds) may be heard late in the development of airway obstruction. Characterized in adults by a severe sore throat.	What are the characteristics of epiglottitis?
What are the characteristics of croup?	Characteristics of this are: An inflammation and swelling of the whole airway (pharynx, larynx, and trachea) typically seen in children 6 months - 3 years old. Stridor and a seal-bark cough, which signal a significant narrowing of the air passage of the trachea that may progress to significant obstruction. Often responds well to the administration of humidified oxygen. Rarely seen in adults because that airways are larger.
Characteristics of this are: An inflammation and swelling of the whole airway (pharynx, larynx, and trachea) typically seen in children 6 months - 3 years old. Stridor and a seal-bark cough, which signal a significant narrowing of the air passage of the trachea that may progress to significant obstruction. Often responds well to the administration of humidified oxygen. Rarely seen in adults because that airways are larger.	What are the characteristics of croup?
What are the characteristics of Respiratory syncytial virus?	Characteristics of this are: A major cause of illness in young children Causes an infection of the lungs and breathing passages Can lead to other serious illnesses that affect the lungs or heart, such as bronchiolitis and pneumonia Highly contagious and spread through droplets Survives on surfaces, including hands and clothing Look for signs of dehydration Humidified oxygen is helpful if available
Characteristics of this are: A major cause of illness in young children Causes an infection of the lungs and breathing passages Can lead to other serious illnesses that affect the lungs or heart, such as bronchiolitis and pneumonia Highly contagious and spread through droplets Survives on surfaces, including hands and clothing Look for signs of dehydration Humidified oxygen is helpful if available	What are the characteristics of Respiratory syncytial virus?
What are the characterisitcs of pertussis (whooping cough)?	"Characteristics of this include: An airborne bacterial infection that affects mostly children younger than 6 years. Patient will be feverish and exhibit a ""whoop"" sound on inspiration after a coughing attack. Highly contagious through droplet infection Coughing spells, which can last for more than a minute, in which the child may turn red or purple. Does not cause the typical whooping illness in adults. It causes a severe upper respiratory infection that could be an entry pathway to pneumonia in older people."
"Characteristics of this include: An airborne bacterial infection that affects mostly children younger than 6 years. Patient will be feverish and exhibit a ""whoop"" sound on inspiration after a coughing attack. Highly contagious through droplet infection Coughing spells, which can last for more than a minute, in which the child may turn red or purple. Does not cause the typical whooping illness in adults. It causes a severe upper respiratory infection that could be an entry pathway to pneumonia in older people."	What are the characterisitcs of pertussis (whooping cough)?
What are the characteristics of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS)?	Characteristics of this are: A serious, potentially life-threatening viral infection caused by a recently discovered family of viruses best known as the second most common cause of the common cold. Usually starts with flu-like symptoms, and may progress to pneumonia, respiratory failure, and, in some cases, death. SARS is thought to be transmitted primarily by close person-to-person contact.
Characteristics of this are: A serious, potentially life-threatening viral infection caused by a recently discovered family of viruses best known as the second most common cause of the common cold. Usually starts with flu-like symptoms, and may progress to pneumonia, respiratory failure, and, in some cases, death. SARS is thought to be transmitted primarily by close person-to-person contact.	What are the characteristics of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS)?
What are the characteristics of Influenza type A?	Characteristics of this are: A virus that has crossed the animal/human barrier and has infected humans. A flu that has the potential to spread at a pandemic level.
Characteristics of this are: A virus that has crossed the animal/human barrier and has infected humans. A flu that has the potential to spread at a pandemic level.	What are the characteristics of Influenza type A?
What are the characteristics of Meningococcal meningitis?	Characteristics of this include: An inflammation of the meningeal coverings of the brain and spinal cord that can be highly contagious. The bacteria can be spread through the exchange of respiratory and throat secretions through coughing and sneezing. The effects are lethal in some cases. Victims who survive can be left with brain damage, hearing loss, or learning disabilities. Patients may present with flulike symptoms, but unique to this are high fever, severe headache, photophobia, and a stiff neck in adults. Patients soemtimes have an altered level of consciousness and can have red blotches on skin. Use respiratory protection, and report and potential cases.
Characteristics of this include: An inflammation of the meningeal coverings of the brain and spinal cord that can be highly contagious. The bacteria can be spread through the exchange of respiratory and throat secretions through coughing and sneezing. The effects are lethal in some cases. Victims who survive can be left with brain damage, hearing loss, or learning disabilities. Patients may present with flulike symptoms, but unique to this are high fever, severe headache, photophobia, and a stiff neck in adults. Patients soemtimes have an altered level of consciousness and can have red blotches on skin. Use respiratory protection, and report and potential cases.	What are the characteristics of Meningococcal meningitis?
What is pulmonary edema?	This is a build up of fluid between the alveoli and the pulmonary capillaries, which interferes with the exchange of carbon dioxide and oxygen. It can result from heart muscle so injured after a heart attack or other illness that it cannot circulate blood properly; in these cases, the left side of the heart cannot remove blood from the lung as fast as the right side delivers it. Patients with this usually experience dyspnea with rapid, shallow respirations, or frothy pink sputum at the nose in mouth in severe cases.
This is a build up of fluid between the alveoli and the pulmonary capillaries, which interferes with the exchange of carbon dioxide and oxygen. It can result from heart muscle so injured after a heart attack or other illness that it cannot circulate blood properly; in these cases, the left side of the heart cannot remove blood from the lung as fast as the right side delivers it. Patients with this usually experience dyspnea with rapid, shallow respirations, or frothy pink sputum at the nose in mouth in severe cases.	What is pulmonary edema?
What is chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)?	The is the slow process of dilation and disruption of the airways and alveoli caused by chronic bronchial obstruction. An estimated 12.1 million adults are reported to have this disease, and is the fourth leading cause of death.
The is the slow process of dilation and disruption of the airways and alveoli caused by chronic bronchial obstruction. An estimated 12.1 million adults are reported to have this disease, and is the fourth leading cause of death.	What is chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)?
What is chronic bronchitis?	This is an ongoing irritation of the trachea and bronchi; excess mucus obstructs small airways and alveoli. This can lead to right-sided heart failure and fluid retention, such as edema in the legs.
This is an ongoing irritation of the trachea and bronchi; excess mucus obstructs small airways and alveoli. This can lead to right-sided heart failure and fluid retention, such as edema in the legs.	What is chronic bronchitis?
What is emphysema?	This is a loss of the elastic material around the air spaces as a result of chronic stretching of the alveoli when inflamed airways (due to smoking for example) obstruct easy explusion of gases.
This is a loss of the elastic material around the air spaces as a result of chronic stretching of the alveoli when inflamed airways (due to smoking for example) obstruct easy explusion of gases.	What is emphysema?
What are the characteristics of COPD?	Characteristics of this are: A disease of the lung characterized by shortness of breath and wheezing. Home oxygen, bronchodilators, and steroids for treatment. Breathing progressively worse over time. Usually in long-term smokers Shortness of breath mostly on exertion Chronic coughing Sputum may be thick No jugular vein distention or dependent edema Patient usually thin with a barrel chest
Characteristics of this are: A disease of the lung characterized by shortness of breath and wheezing. Home oxygen, bronchodilators, and steroids for treatment. Breathing progressively worse over time. Usually in long-term smokers Shortness of breath mostly on exertion Chronic coughing Sputum may be thick No jugular vein distention or dependent edema Patient usually thin with a barrel chest	What are the characteristics of COPD?
What are the characteristics of Congestive Heart Failure?	Characteristics of this are: A disease of the heart characterized by shortness of breath, edema, and weakness. Diuretics prescribed to help promote cardiac function and to reduce fluid loads on the heart. Sudden onset of shortness of breath. Patient may or may not smoke. Shortness of breath all the time. Coughing Sputum may be pink and frothy. Jugular vein distention and dependent edema. May have distended abdomen.
Characteristics of this are: A disease of the heart characterized by shortness of breath, edema, and weakness. Diuretics prescribed to help promote cardiac function and to reduce fluid loads on the heart. Sudden onset of shortness of breath. Patient may or may not smoke. Shortness of breath all the time. Coughing Sputum may be pink and frothy. Jugular vein distention and dependent edema. May have distended abdomen.	What are the characteristics of Congestive Heart Failure?
What is the sequence of events in anaphylaxis?	The sequence of events for this is: A. The antigen is introduced to the body. B. The antigen-antibody reaction at the surface of a mast cell. C. Release of a cell chemical mediators. D. Chemical mediators exert their effects on end organs.
The sequence of events for this is: A. The antigen is introduced to the body. B. The antigen-antibody reaction at the surface of a mast cell. C. Release of a cell chemical mediators. D. Chemical mediators exert their effects on end organs.	What is the sequence of events in anaphylaxis?
What is pneumothorax?	This is a partial or complete accumulation of air in the pleural space. It is often caused by trauma.
This is a partial or complete accumulation of air in the pleural space. It is often caused by trauma.	What is pneumothorax?
When may spontaneous pneumothorax occur?	This tends to occur in patients with certain chronic lung infections or in young people born with weak areas of the lung, and often during severe coughing.
This tends to occur in patients with certain chronic lung infections or in young people born with weak areas of the lung, and often during severe coughing.	When may spontaneous pneumothorax occur?
What is pleuritic chest pain?	This is a sharp, stabbing pain on one side that is worse during inspiration and expiration or with certain movements of the chest wall.
This is a sharp, stabbing pain on one side that is worse during inspiration and expiration or with certain movements of the chest wall.	What is pleuritic chest pain?
What is a pleural effusion?	This is a collection of fluid outside the lung on one or both sides of the chest. Patients will have decreased lung sounds and will feel better sitting upright.
This is a collection of fluid outside the lung on one or both sides of the chest. Patients will have decreased lung sounds and will feel better sitting upright.	What is a pleural effusion?
What is a tonic-clonic seizure?	This, also called a grand mal seizure, is one in which the patient has a sudden loss of consciousness, rapid muscle movement of the body, and often incontinence. This type of seizure typically only lasts minutes.
This, also called a grand mal seizure, is one in which the patient has a sudden loss of consciousness, rapid muscle movement of the body, and often incontinence. This type of seizure typically only lasts minutes.	What is a tonic-clonic seizure?
What is status epilipticus?	This is when a patient continues to have seizures every few minutes without regaining consciousness, and/or the seizure lasts longer than 30 minutes. It could be life threatening.
This is when a patient continues to have seizures every few minutes without regaining consciousness, and/or the seizure lasts longer than 30 minutes. It could be life threatening.	What is status epilipticus?
What is an embolus?	This is anything in the circulatory system that moves from it's point of origin to a distant site and lodges there, obstructing subsequent blood flow in that area.
This is anything in the circulatory system that moves from it's point of origin to a distant site and lodges there, obstructing subsequent blood flow in that area.	What is an embolus?
What is a pulmonary embolism?	This is the passage of a blood clot formed in a vein, usually in the legs or pelvis, that breaks off and circulates through the venous system, enters the pulmonary artery, where it becomes lodged, significantly decreasing or blocking blood flow. Arterial carbon dioxide rises, and oxygen level may drop enough to cause cyanosis.
This is the passage of a blood clot formed in a vein, usually in the legs or pelvis, that breaks off and circulates through the venous system, enters the pulmonary artery, where it becomes lodged, significantly decreasing or blocking blood flow. Arterial carbon dioxide rises, and oxygen level may drop enough to cause cyanosis.	What is a pulmonary embolism?
What are the signs and symptoms of pulmonary embolisms?	Signs and symptoms of these include: Dyspnea Acute chest pain Hemoptysis (coughing up blood) Cyanosis Tachypnea Vary degrees of hypoxia
Signs and symptoms of these include: Dyspnea Acute chest pain Hemoptysis (coughing up blood) Cyanosis Tachypnea Vary degrees of hypoxia	What are the signs and symptoms of pulmonary embolisms?
What is acidosis?	This is the buildup of excess acid in the blood or body tissues that results from the primary illness.
This is the buildup of excess acid in the blood or body tissues that results from the primary illness.	What is acidosis?
What is alkalosis?	This is the buildup of excess base in the body fluids.
This is the buildup of excess base in the body fluids.	What is alkalosis?
What is Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA)?	This is a bacterium that can cause infection in different parts of the body and is transmitted by different routes. It is resistant to many commonly used antibiotics.
This is a bacterium that can cause infection in different parts of the body and is transmitted by different routes. It is resistant to many commonly used antibiotics.	What is Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA)?
What is tuberculosis (TB)?	This is an infection most commonyl found in the lungs but can also affect any organ of the body, including the kidneys, bones, and meninges.
This is an infection most commonyl found in the lungs but can also affect any organ of the body, including the kidneys, bones, and meninges.	What is tuberculosis (TB)?
What are adventitious breath sounds?	These are abnormal, decreased, or absent breath sounds.
These are abnormal, decreased, or absent breath sounds.	What are adventitious breath sounds?
What are vesicular breath sounds?	These are normal breath sounds in a patient.
These are normal breath sounds in a patient.	What are vesicular breath sounds?
What are some risk factors for congestive heart failure?	Risk factors for this include hypertension and a history of coronary artery disease and/or atrial fibrillation, a condition in which the atria no longer contract, but quiver.
Risk factors for this include hypertension and a history of coronary artery disease and/or atrial fibrillation, a condition in which the atria no longer contract, but quiver.	What are some risk factors for congestive heart failure?
What are some signs and symptoms of congestive heart failure?	Signs and symptoms of this are: cool, diaphoretic, and/or cyanotic skin Adventitious breath sounds such as crackles, wheezing, or rales A tachycardiac pulse.
Signs and symptoms of this are: cool, diaphoretic, and/or cyanotic skin Adventitious breath sounds such as crackles, wheezing, or rales A tachycardiac pulse.	What are some signs and symptoms of congestive heart failure?
What is cystic fibrosis (CF)?	This is a genetic disorder that affects the lungs and digestive system. This disrupts the normal function of cells that make up the sweat glands in the skin and that also line the lungs and digestive and reproductive systems.
This is a genetic disorder that affects the lungs and digestive system. This disrupts the normal function of cells that make up the sweat glands in the skin and that also line the lungs and digestive and reproductive systems.	What is cystic fibrosis (CF)?
What does croup often respond well to?	This often responds well to humidified oxygen.
This often responds well to humidified oxygen.	What does croup often respond well to?
What is proper treatment for hyperventilation?	Proper treatment for this consists of: reassuing the patient, supplying supplemental oxygen, and providing prompt transport to the emergency department.
Proper treatment for this consists of: reassuing the patient, supplying supplemental oxygen, and providing prompt transport to the emergency department.	What is proper treatment for hyperventilation?
What is the proper treatment for pulmonary embolism?	Proper treatment for this consists of: Placing the patient in a comfrotable position, be aware of possible hemoptysis as an airway obstruction, and transport promptly, as this may cause cardiac arrest.
Proper treatment for this consists of: Placing the patient in a comfrotable position, be aware of possible hemoptysis as an airway obstruction, and transport promptly, as this may cause cardiac arrest.	What is the proper treatment for pulmonary embolism?
What should you watch for in patients with COPD?	Oftentimes these patients will overuse their inhalers, so watch for side effects.
Oftentimes these patients will overuse their inhalers, so watch for side effects.	What should you watch for in patients with COPD?
What does PASTE stand for?	This stands for: Progression: You want to know if the problem started suddenly or has worsened Associated chest pain: Dyspnea can be a significant symptom of a cardiac problem. Sputum: Mucus like sputum could indicate a respiratory infection, while frothy pink sputum indicates fluid in the lungs. Talking tiredness: How many words a patient can saw between breaths. Exercise tolerance: What activity was the patient doing before the problem started.
What is wheezing?	This is a sound that is generally heard on exhalation as a high-pitched, almost whistling sound. It is extremely common in patients with asthma and sometimes in patients with COPD; it indicates constriction and/or inflammation in the bronchus.
This is a sound that is generally heard on exhalation as a high-pitched, almost whistling sound. It is extremely common in patients with asthma and sometimes in patients with COPD; it indicates constriction and/or inflammation in the bronchus.	What is wheezing?
What are rales?	"These are the sounds of air trying to pass through fluid in the alveoli. It is a crackling or bubbling sound typically heard on inspiration. There are high-pitched ""fine"" sounds and low-pitched ""coarse"" sounds. These often indicate congestive heart failure, pulmonary edema, or other fluid in the lungs."
"These are the sounds of air trying to pass through fluid in the alveoli. It is a crackling or bubbling sound typically heard on inspiration. There are high-pitched ""fine"" sounds and low-pitched ""coarse"" sounds. These often indicate congestive heart failure, pulmonary edema, or other fluid in the lungs."	What are rales?
What are rhonchi?	"These are lower pitched sounds caused by secretions or mucus in the larger airway. The sound resembles rattling or is sometimes referred to as ""junky"" lung sounds. It indicates infections, pneumonia, or bronchitis."
"These are lower pitched sounds caused by secretions or mucus in the larger airway. The sound resembles rattling or is sometimes referred to as ""junky"" lung sounds. It indicates infections, pneumonia, or bronchitis."	What are rhonchi?
What is stridor?	This is a high-pitched sound heard on inspiration as air tries to pass through obstruction in the upper airway. This indicates a partial obstruction of the trachea and is seen in patients with anatomic or foreign body airway obstruction.
This is a high-pitched sound heard on inspiration as air tries to pass through obstruction in the upper airway. This indicates a partial obstruction of the trachea and is seen in patients with anatomic or foreign body airway obstruction.	What is stridor?
What is an example of an endocrine condition?	An example of this kind of condition is diabetes mellitus.
An example of this kind of condition is diabetes mellitus.	What is an example of an endocrine condition?
What are the 5 major components of patient assessment?	These are: Scene size-up Primary assessment History taking Secondary assessment Reassessment
These are: Scene size-up Primary assessment History taking Secondary assessment Reassessment	What are the 5 major components of patient assessment?
What is the index of suspicion?	This is your awareness and concern for potentially serious underlying and unseen injuries or illness.
This is your awareness and concern for potentially serious underlying and unseen injuries or illness.	What is the index of suspicion?
Where can the pulse be most stronly palpated?	This can be most strongly palpated at the carotid artery.
This can be most strongly palpated at the carotid artery.	Where can the pulse be most stronly palpated?
What kinds of patients are always considered in serious condition and should be transported immediately?	These kinds of patients include: Patients who are unconscious or who have an altered mental status Patients with airway or breathing problems Patients with obvious  circulation problems such as severe bleeding or signs of shock
These kinds of patients include: Patients who are unconscious or who have an altered mental status Patients with airway or breathing problems Patients with obvious  circulation problems such as severe bleeding or signs of shock	What kinds of patients are always considered in serious condition and should be transported immediately?
How often should you recheck vitals?	You should recheck these every 5 minutes for unstable patients or every 15 minutes for stable patients.
You should recheck these every 5 minutes for unstable patients or every 15 minutes for stable patients.	How often should you recheck vitals?
How much time should you spend on scene?	You should spend no more than 10 minutes here.
You should spend no more than 10 minutes here.	How much time should you spend on scene?
What should you remember about stable patients who are also very old or very young?	You should remember that these types of patients should still be considered critical.
You should remember that these types of patients should still be considered critical.	What should you remember about stable patients who are also very old or very young?
What are some typical chief complaints?	Typical kinds of these include fever. nausea, rash, pleuritic chest pain, and difficulty breathing.
Typical kinds of these include fever. nausea, rash, pleuritic chest pain, and difficulty breathing.	What are some typical chief complaints?
What are some general management principles?	Some of these include: Place the patient in the position of comfort on the stretcher to keep warm. Be empathetic. Always show respect for the feelings of the patient and family members.
Some of these include: Place the patient in the position of comfort on the stretcher to keep warm. Be empathetic. Always show respect for the feelings of the patient and family members.	What are some general management principles?
What is herpes simplex?	This is a common virus strain carried by humans. 80% of individuals carrying it are asymptomatic.
This is a common virus strain carried by humans. 80% of individuals carrying it are asymptomatic.	What is herpes simplex?
What other virus is far more contagious than HIV?	Hepatitis B is far more contagious than this.
Hepatitis B is far more contagious than this.	What other virus is far more contagious than HIV?
How is syphilis transmitted?	This disease is transmitted both sexually and via bloodborne vectors.
This disease is transmitted both sexually and via bloodborne vectors.	How is syphilis transmitted?
What is a common symptom of initial syphilis infection?	An initial infection of this disease is a lesion called a chancre, commonly located in the genital region.
An initial infection of this disease is a lesion called a chancre, commonly located in the genital region.	What is a common symptom of initial syphilis infection?
What is virulence?	This is the strength or ability of a pathogen to produce disease.
This is the strength or ability of a pathogen to produce disease.	What is virulence?
What is meningitis?	This is an inflammation of the meningeal coverings of the brain and spinal cord. Signs and symptoms are fever, headache, stiff neck, and AMS. It is highly contagious.
This is an inflammation of the meningeal coverings of the brain and spinal cord. Signs and symptoms are fever, headache, stiff neck, and AMS. It is highly contagious.	What is meningitis?
How long can Mycobacterium tuberculosis remain alive?	As long as they are shielded from ultraviolet light, these bacterium can stay alive for decades.
As long as they are shielded from ultraviolet light, these bacterium can stay alive for decades.	How long can Mycobacterium tuberculosis remain alive?
What is another name for H1N1?	"Another name for this is the ""swine flu""."
"Another name for this is the ""swine flu""."	What is another name for H1N1?
What are the characteristics of of Hepatitis A?	Characteristics of this are: Route infection via fecal-oral, infected food, or drink An incubation period of 2-6 weeks A vaccine is available, and no treatment is available Mild illness, approx. 2% or people die. After infection, patient has life-long immunity
Characteristics of this are: Route infection via fecal-oral, infected food, or drink An incubation period of 2-6 weeks A vaccine is available, and no treatment is available Mild illness, approx. 2% or people die. After infection, patient has life-long immunity	What are the characteristics of of Hepatitis A?
What are the characteristics of of Hepatitis B?	Route of infection via blood, sexual contact, saliva, urine, breast milk 4-12 week incubation period Chronic infection affect up to 10% of pateints and 90% of newborns Vaccine available, treatment is minimally effective. Up to 30% of patients may become chronic carriers; patients are asymptomatic and without signs of liver disease. Approx. 1-2% of patients die.
Route of infection via blood, sexual contact, saliva, urine, breast milk 4-12 week incubation period Chronic infection affect up to 10% of pateints and 90% of newborns Vaccine available, treatment is minimally effective. Up to 30% of patients may become chronic carriers; patients are asymptomatic and without signs of liver disease. Approx. 1-2% of patients die.	What are the characteristics of of Hepatitis B?
What are the characteristics of of Hepatitis C?	Route of infection via blood or sexual contact 2-10 week of incubation Chronic infection affects 90% of patients No vaccine available, treatment minimally effective Cirrhosis of the liver develops in 50% of patients; chronic infection increases the risk of liver cancer
Route of infection via blood or sexual contact 2-10 week of incubation Chronic infection affects 90% of patients No vaccine available, treatment minimally effective Cirrhosis of the liver develops in 50% of patients; chronic infection increases the risk of liver cancer	What are the characteristics of of Hepatitis C?
What are the characteristics of of Hepatitis D?	Route of infection via blood or sexual contact 4-12 weeks of incubation Chronic infection common No vaccine or treatment available Occurs only in patients with active hepatitis B infection; fulminant disease may develop in 20% of patients.
Route of infection via blood or sexual contact 4-12 weeks of incubation Chronic infection common No vaccine or treatment available Occurs only in patients with active hepatitis B infection; fulminant disease may develop in 20% of patients.	What are the characteristics of of Hepatitis D?
What are the characteristics of of Toxin-induced Hepatitis?	Characteristics of this are: route of infection via inhalation, skin or mucus membrane exposure, oral ingestion, or intravenous administration Incubation hours to days after exposure Some chemicals may initiate an inflammatory response that continues to cause liver damage long after the chemical is out of the body. No vaccine available. Patients may have jaundice.
Characteristics of this are: route of infection via inhalation, skin or mucus membrane exposure, oral ingestion, or intravenous administration Incubation hours to days after exposure Some chemicals may initiate an inflammatory response that continues to cause liver damage long after the chemical is out of the body. No vaccine available. Patients may have jaundice.	What are the characteristics of of Toxin-induced Hepatitis?
What is the hantavirus?	This is a newly recognized disease, transmitted via rodent urine and droppings
This is a newly recognized disease, transmitted via rodent urine and droppings	What is the hantavirus?
How is the West Nile Virus transmitted?	This virus' vector is the mosquito.
This virus' vector is the mosquito.	How is the West Nile Virus transmitted?
What is the order of BLS if you suspect cardiac arrest?	If this is suspected, BLS order becomes CAB.
If this is suspected, BLS order becomes CAB.	What is the order of BLS if you suspect cardiac arrest?
What is the chain of survival?	This is: 1. Early access (ie Access EMS by calling 911) 2. Early CPR (keeps blood flowing) 3. Early defibrillation 4. Early advanced care 5. Integrated post-arrest care (including controlling temperature and maintaining glucose levels in the patient who is hypoglycemic)
This is: 1. Early access (ie Access EMS by calling 911) 2. Early CPR (keeps blood flowing) 3. Early defibrillation 4. Early advanced care 5. Integrated post-arrest care (including controlling temperature and maintaining glucose levels in the patient who is hypoglycemic)	What is the chain of survival?
What is important to remember regarding time and CPR?	It's important to remember regarding this that few patients survive cardiac arrest if this is not administered within the first few minutes, and if the time from cardiac arrest to defibrillation is more than 10 minutes, the chance of survival is minimal.
It's important to remember regarding this that few patients survive cardiac arrest if this is not administered within the first few minutes, and if the time from cardiac arrest to defibrillation is more than 10 minutes, the chance of survival is minimal.	What is important to remember regarding time and CPR?
What is arrhythmia?	This is sudden cardiac rhythm disturbance.
This is sudden cardiac rhythm disturbance.	What is arrhythmia?
What is ventricular fibrillation?	This is the disorganized twitching of the ventricles, resulting in no blood flow and a state of cardiac arrest.
This is the disorganized twitching of the ventricles, resulting in no blood flow and a state of cardiac arrest.	What is ventricular fibrillation?
For each minute the patient remains in V-fib or pulseless V-tach, how much does the chance of survival decrease?	For each minute in these states, there is a 7% to 10% less chance of survival.
For each minute in these states, there is a 7% to 10% less chance of survival.	For each minute the patient remains in V-fib or pulseless V-tach, how much does the chance of survival decrease?
What is a common cause of cardiac arrest in children?	Respiratory failure is usually the cause of this in children.
Respiratory failure is usually the cause of this in children.	What is a common cause of cardiac arrest in children?
Where should you place the AED electrode on patients with an implanted defibrillator or pacemaker?	If you see a patient with one of these, you should place the AED electrode at least 1 inch to the side of the device.
If you see a patient with one of these, you should place the AED electrode at least 1 inch to the side of the device.	Where should you place the AED electrode on patients with an implanted defibrillator or pacemaker?
On average, how much blood is pumped through the body when external chest compressions are performed as proficiently as possible?	Only one third of the blood that is normally pumped by is circulated through this method.
Only one third of the blood that is normally pumped by is circulated through this method.	On average, how much blood is pumped through the body when external chest compressions are performed as proficiently as possible?
Where should the patient's head be while administring chest compressions?	This should not be elevated at a level above the heart because this will further reduce blood flow to the brain.
This should not be elevated at a level above the heart because this will further reduce blood flow to the brain.	Where should the patient's head be while administring chest compressions?
What kind of surface should a patient receiving chest compressions be placed on?	During this, the patient should be palced on the floor or have a board placed under the back.
During this, the patient should be palced on the floor or have a board placed under the back.	What kind of surface should a patient receiving chest compressions be placed on?
When performing CPR on an adult, how many chest compressions should be given a minute?	Give at least 100 compressions per minute for this type of patient.
Give at least 100 compressions per minute for this type of patient.	When performing CPR on an adult, how many chest compressions should be given a minute?
What is the recovery position?	This is a side-lying position (patient's hand under their head) used to maintain a clear airway in unconscious patients without injuries who are adequately breathing.
This is a side-lying position (patient's hand under their head) used to maintain a clear airway in unconscious patients without injuries who are adequately breathing.	What is the recovery position?
What is the focus of pediatric BLS?	The focus of BLS for these types of patients is airway and breathing.
The focus of BLS for these types of patients is airway and breathing.	What is the focus of pediatric BLS?
Where do you check the pulse on infants?	You check the pulse on the brachial artery for these patients.
You check the pulse on the brachial artery for these patients.	Where do you check the pulse on infants?
Where do you check the pulse on children (1-12 years)?	You check the pulse on the carotid or femoral artery for these patients.
You check the pulse on the carotid or femoral artery for these patients.	Where do you check the pulse on children (1-12 years)?
What is the compression rate for infants and children in CPR?	For these patients, the compression rate is at least 100/min.
For these patients, the compression rate is at least 100/min.	What is the compression rate for infants and children in CPR?
What is the compression-to-ventilation ratio in CPR for infants and children?	For these patients, the compression-to-ventilation ratio is 30:2 for one rescuer, and 15:2 for 2 rescuers.
For these patients, the compression-to-ventilation ratio is 30:2 for one rescuer, and 15:2 for 2 rescuers.	What is the compression-to-ventilation ratio in CPR for infants and children?
With infants and children, what is the ventilation rate during CPR?	With these patients, the ventilation rate is 1 breath every 3-5 seconds.
With these patients, the ventilation rate is 1 breath every 3-5 seconds.	With infants and children, what is the ventilation rate during CPR?
What should you do with a patient who has a mild airway obstruction?	With these patients, you should encourage him or her to cough or to continue coughing if they are already doing so.
With these patients, you should encourage him or her to cough or to continue coughing if they are already doing so.	What should you do with a patient who has a mild airway obstruction?
What is homeostasis?	This is a balance of all systems and conditions of the body; as shock progresses, this degrades.
This is a balance of all systems and conditions of the body; as shock progresses, this degrades.	What is homeostasis?
What are the three parts of the cardiovascular system?	The three parts of this system are: A pump, A set of pipes, and the contents of the container.
The three parts of this system are: A pump, A set of pipes, and the contents of the container.	What are the three parts of the cardiovascular system?
What is systolic pressure?	This is the peak arterial pressure, or pressure generated every time the heart contracts.
This is the peak arterial pressure, or pressure generated every time the heart contracts.	What is systolic pressure?
What is diastolic pressure?	This is the pressure maintained within the arteries while the heart rests between the heartbeats.
This is the pressure maintained within the arteries while the heart rests between the heartbeats.	What is diastolic pressure?
What are sphincters?	These are circular muscles that encircle and, by contracting, constrict a duct, tube, or opening.
These are circular muscles that encircle and, by contracting, constrict a duct, tube, or opening.	What are sphincters?
What are the three basic causes of shock?	The three basic causes of this are:   1. Pump failure (caused by: heart attack, trauma to heart, and obstructive causes). 2. Low fluid volume (caused by: trauma to vessels or tissues, and fluid loss from GI tract), and, 3. Poor vessel function (caused by: infection, drug overdose, spinal cord injuries, and anaphylaxis).
The three basic causes of this are:   1. Pump failure (caused by: heart attack, trauma to heart, and obstructive causes). 2. Low fluid volume (caused by: trauma to vessels or tissues, and fluid loss from GI tract), and, 3. Poor vessel function (caused by: infection, drug overdose, spinal cord injuries, and anaphylaxis).	What are the three basic causes of shock?
What does pump failure cause?	Cardiogenic and obstructive shock are caused by this kind of failure.
Cardiogenic and obstructive shock are caused by this kind of failure.	What does pump failure cause?
What kinds of shock does poor vessel function cause?	Distributive shock, septic shock, neurogenic shock, anaphylactic shock, and psychogenic shock are caused by this kind of failure.
Distributive shock, septic shock, neurogenic shock, anaphylactic shock, and psychogenic shock are caused by this kind of failure.	What kinds of shock does poor vessel function cause?
What kinds of shock does low fluid volume cause?	Hypovolemic shock, hemorrhagic shock, and nonhemorrhagic shock are caused by this kind of failure.
Hypovolemic shock, hemorrhagic shock, and nonhemorrhagic shock are caused by this kind of failure.	What kinds of shock does low fluid volume cause?
What causes cardiogenic shock?	This is caused by inadequate functioning of the heart, or pump failure.
This is caused by inadequate functioning of the heart, or pump failure.	What causes cardiogenic shock?
What is edema?	This is the presence of abnormally large amounts of fluid between cells in body tissues, causing swelling of the affected area.
This is the presence of abnormally large amounts of fluid between cells in body tissues, causing swelling of the affected area.	What is edema?
When does cardiogenic shock develop?	This develops when the heart cannot maintain sufficient output (or cardiac output) to meet the demands of the body.
This develops when the heart cannot maintain sufficient output (or cardiac output) to meet the demands of the body.	When does cardiogenic shock develop?
What is myocardial contractility?	This is the ability for the heart to contract.
This is the ability for the heart to contract.	What is myocardial contractility?
What is preload?	This is the precontraction pressure in the heart as the volume of blood builds up.
This is the precontraction pressure in the heart as the volume of blood builds up.	What is preload?
What is afterload?	This is the force or resistance against which the heart pumps.
This is the force or resistance against which the heart pumps.	What is afterload?
What is obstructive shock?	This results when conditions that cause mechanical obstruction of the cardiac muscle also impact pump function.
This results when conditions that cause mechanical obstruction of the cardiac muscle also impact pump function.	What is obstructive shock?
What are two of the most common examples of obstructive shock?	Two of the most common examples of this are cardiac tamponade and tension pneumothorax.
Two of the most common examples of this are cardiac tamponade and tension pneumothorax.	What are two of the most common examples of obstructive shock?
What is a cardiac tamponade (A.K.A. a pericardial tamponade)?	This is a collection of fluid between the pericardial sac and the myocardium. It is caused by blunt or penetrating trauma and can progress rapidly.
This is a collection of fluid between the pericardial sac and the myocardium. It is caused by blunt or penetrating trauma and can progress rapidly.	What is a cardiac tamponade (A.K.A. a pericardial tamponade)?
What happens during a cardiac tamponade?	When this occurs, blood leaks into the tough fibrous membrane known as the pericardium, causing an accumulation of blood within the pericardial sac. This accumulation leads to compression of the heart. Because the pericardium has a limited ability to stretch, each contraction of the heart allows more blood accumulation between the heart and the sac. The accumulated blood prevents the heart from opening up to allow complete refilling.
When this occurs, blood leaks into the tough fibrous membrane known as the pericardium, causing an accumulation of blood within the pericardial sac. This accumulation leads to compression of the heart. Because the pericardium has a limited ability to stretch, each contraction of the heart allows more blood accumulation between the heart and the sac. The accumulated blood prevents the heart from opening up to allow complete refilling.	What happens during a cardiac tamponade?
What are the signs and symptoms of cardiac tamponade?	The signs and symptoms of this are referred to as Beck's Triad. They are: 1) Jugular vein distention. 2) Muffled heart sounds, and 3) The merging of systolic and diastolic blood pressure.
The signs and symptoms of this are referred to as Beck's Triad. They are: 1) Jugular vein distention. 2) Muffled heart sounds, and 3) The merging of systolic and diastolic blood pressure.	What are the signs and symptoms of cardiac tamponade?
What causes tension pneumothorax?	This is caused by damage to the lung tissue. This damage allows air normally held within the lung to escape into the chest cavity. If this condition is allowed to continue untreated, a sufficient amount of air will accumulate within the chest cavity and begin applying pressure to the structures in the mediastinum. The trapped air begins to shift the chest organs toward the uninjured side, which creates the condition.
This is caused by damage to the lung tissue. This damage allows air normally held within the lung to escape into the chest cavity. If this condition is allowed to continue untreated, a sufficient amount of air will accumulate within the chest cavity and begin applying pressure to the structures in the mediastinum. The trapped air begins to shift the chest organs toward the uninjured side, which creates the condition.	What causes tension pneumothorax?
What is distributive shock?	This is when there is widespread dilation of the small arterioles, small venules, or both.
This is when there is widespread dilation of the small arterioles, small venules, or both.	What is distributive shock?
What is septic shock?	This is a result of severe infections, usually bacterial, in which toxins are generated by the bacteria or by infected body tissues; the toxins damage the vessel walls, causing increased cellular permeability. The vessel walls leak and are unable to contract well. Widespread dilation of vessels, in combination with plasma loss through the injured vessel walls, resulting in shock.
This is a result of severe infections, usually bacterial, in which toxins are generated by the bacteria or by infected body tissues; the toxins damage the vessel walls, causing increased cellular permeability. The vessel walls leak and are unable to contract well. Widespread dilation of vessels, in combination with plasma loss through the injured vessel walls, resulting in shock.	What is septic shock?
What is usually the cause of neurogenic shock?	This is usually caused by damage to the spinal cord, particularly at the upper cervical level, which damages the part of the nervous system that controls the size and muscular tone of the blood vessels.
This is usually caused by damage to the spinal cord, particularly at the upper cervical level, which damages the part of the nervous system that controls the size and muscular tone of the blood vessels.	What is usually the cause of neurogenic shock?
What is an important consideration in patients in neurogenic shock?	One important consideration in these kinds of patients is that these patients lack the ability to regulate body temperature.
One important consideration in these kinds of patients is that these patients lack the ability to regulate body temperature.	What is an important consideration in patients in neurogenic shock?
What are signs of anaphylactic shock on the skin, in the circulatory system, and in the respiratory system?	Signs of this include:   On the skin: Flushing, itching, or burning, especially over the face and upper part of the chest. Urticaria, which may spread over large areas of the body. Edema, especially of the face, tongue, and lips. Pallor. And, Cyanosis about the lips.   In the circulatory system: Dilation of peripheral blood vessels. Increased vessel permeability. A drop in blood pressure. A weak, barely palpable pulse. Dizziness. And, Fainting and coma.   In the respiratory system: Sneezing or itching. Tightness in the chest, with a persistent dry cough. Wheezing and dyspnea. Secretions of fluid and mucus into the bronchial passages, alveoli, and lung tissues, causing coughing. Constriction of the bronchi. Forced expiration accompanied by wheezing. And, Eventual cessation of breathing.
Signs of this include:   On the skin: Flushing, itching, or burning, especially over the face and upper part of the chest. Urticaria, which may spread over large areas of the body. Edema, especially of the face, tongue, and lips. Pallor. And, Cyanosis about the lips.   In the circulatory system: Dilation of peripheral blood vessels. Increased vessel permeability. A drop in blood pressure. A weak, barely palpable pulse. Dizziness. And, Fainting and coma.   In the respiratory system: Sneezing or itching. Tightness in the chest, with a persistent dry cough. Wheezing and dyspnea. Secretions of fluid and mucus into the bronchial passages, alveoli, and lung tissues, causing coughing. Constriction of the bronchi. Forced expiration accompanied by wheezing. And, Eventual cessation of breathing.	What are signs of anaphylactic shock on the skin, in the circulatory system, and in the respiratory system?
What is psychogenic shock?	This is when a patient has had a sudden reaction of the nervous system that produces a temporary, generalized vascular dilation, resulting in fainting, or syncope.
This is when a patient has had a sudden reaction of the nervous system that produces a temporary, generalized vascular dilation, resulting in fainting, or syncope.	What is psychogenic shock?
What are some causes of syncope that are potentially life threatening?	Causes of this that are potentially life threatening are an irregular heartbeat or brain aneurysm.
Causes of this that are potentially life threatening are an irregular heartbeat or brain aneurysm.	What are some causes of syncope that are potentially life threatening?
What is hypovolemic shock?	This is the result of inadequate amount of fluid or volume in the system.
This is the result of inadequate amount of fluid or volume in the system.	What is hypovolemic shock?
What are some causes of hypovolemic shock?	Some causes of this kind of shock include hemorrhagic causes, non-hemorrhagic causes (such as vomiting and diarrhea), as well as severe thermal burns; in those cases, it is intravascular plasma that is lost, leaking from the circulatory system into the burned tissues.
Some causes of this kind of shock include hemorrhagic causes, non-hemorrhagic causes (such as vomiting and diarrhea), as well as severe thermal burns; in those cases, it is intravascular plasma that is lost, leaking from the circulatory system into the burned tissues.	What are some causes of hypovolemic shock?
How does carbon monoxide affect the ability of cells to metabolize or carry oxygen?	This substance has a 250 times greater affinity for hemoglobin than oxygen. If a patient is in an environment with this substance, it will bind to the blood's hemoglobin, preventing oxygen from binding.
This substance has a 250 times greater affinity for hemoglobin than oxygen. If a patient is in an environment with this substance, it will bind to the blood's hemoglobin, preventing oxygen from binding.	How does carbon monoxide affect the ability of cells to metabolize or carry oxygen?
What is compensated shock?	This is the early stage of shock, when the body can still compensate for blood loss. Signs and symptoms include: Agitation, Anxiety, Restlessness, Feeling of impending doom, A.M.S., Weak, rapid, or absent pulse, Clammy skin, Pallor with cyanosis around the lips, Shallow, rapid breathing, Shortness of breath, Nausea or vomiting, And, Marked thirst.
This is the early stage of shock, when the body can still compensate for blood loss. Signs and symptoms include: Agitation, Anxiety, Restlessness, Feeling of impending doom, A.M.S., Weak, rapid, or absent pulse, Clammy skin, Pallor with cyanosis around the lips, Shallow, rapid breathing, Shortness of breath, Nausea or vomiting, And, Marked thirst.	What is compensated shock?
What is decompensated shock?	This is a later stage of shock, when blood pressure falls. Signs and symptoms include: Falling blood pressure (systolic blood pressure of 90 mm Hg or lower in an adult), Labored or irregular breathing, Ashen, mottled, or cyanotic skin, Thready or absent peripheral pulses, Dilated pupils, And, Poor urinary output.
This is a later stage of shock, when blood pressure falls. Signs and symptoms include: Falling blood pressure (systolic blood pressure of 90 mm Hg or lower in an adult), Labored or irregular breathing, Ashen, mottled, or cyanotic skin, Thready or absent peripheral pulses, Dilated pupils, And, Poor urinary output.	What is decompensated shock?
What is irreversible shock?	This is the last stage of shock, when shock has progressed to a terminal stage. A transfusion during this stage will not save the patient's life.
This is the last stage of shock, when shock has progressed to a terminal stage. A transfusion during this stage will not save the patient's life.	What is irreversible shock?
What should you remember about blood pressure drops in children and infants?	Remember that these patients can maintain their blood pressure until they have lost more than half their blood volume. By the time their blood pressure drops in shock, they are close to death.
Remember that these patients can maintain their blood pressure until they have lost more than half their blood volume. By the time their blood pressure drops in shock, they are close to death.	What should you remember about blood pressure drops in children and infants?
Which conditions in patients should make you suspect shock?	You should expect this if a patient has any one of the following conditions: Multiple severe fractures, Abdominal or chest injury, Spinal injury, A severe infection, A major heart attack, And, Anaphylaxis.
You should expect this if a patient has any one of the following conditions: Multiple severe fractures, Abdominal or chest injury, Spinal injury, A severe infection, A major heart attack, And, Anaphylaxis.	Which conditions in patients should make you suspect shock?
What is the only real effective treatment for a severe, acute allergic reaction?	The only real effective treatment for this is to administer epinephrine.
The only real effective treatment for this is to administer epinephrine.	What is the only real effective treatment for a severe, acute allergic reaction?
What are the signs and symptoms of cardiogenic shock, and how should you treat it?	Signs and symptoms of this include: Chest pain, Irregular pulse, Weak pulse, Low blood pressure, Cyanosis of the lips and under the nails, Cool, clammy skin, Anxiety,  Rales,  and pulmonary edema.   Treat this by: Positioning the patient comfortably, administering oxygen, assisting with ventilations, and transporting promptly.
Signs and symptoms of this include: Chest pain, Irregular pulse, Weak pulse, Low blood pressure, Cyanosis of the lips and under the nails, Cool, clammy skin, Anxiety,  Rales,  and pulmonary edema.   Treat this by: Positioning the patient comfortably, administering oxygen, assisting with ventilations, and transporting promptly.	What are the signs and symptoms of cardiogenic shock, and how should you treat it?
What are the signs and symptoms of obstructive shock, and how should you treat it?	Signs and symptoms of this are dependent on the cause, and include: Dyspnea, A rapid, weak pulse, Rapid, shallow breaths, Decreased lung compliance, Unilateral, decreased, or absent breath sounds, Decreased blood pressure, Subcutaneous emphysema, Cyanosis, Tracheal deviation towards the unaffected side, and, Beck's Triad, which are: Muffled heart sounds, Jugular vein distention, and, The merging of systolic and diastolic blood pressure.   Treatment of this is also dependent on the cause, and includes: ALS assist, and / or rapid transport.
Signs and symptoms of this are dependent on the cause, and include: Dyspnea, A rapid, weak pulse, Rapid, shallow breaths, Decreased lung compliance, Unilateral, decreased, or absent breath sounds, Decreased blood pressure, Subcutaneous emphysema, Cyanosis, Tracheal deviation towards the unaffected side, and, Beck's Triad, which are: Muffled heart sounds, Jugular vein distention, and, The merging of systolic and diastolic blood pressure.   Treatment of this is also dependent on the cause, and includes: ALS assist, and / or rapid transport.	What are the signs and symptoms of obstructive shock, and how should you treat it?
What are the signs and symptoms of septic shock, and how should you treat it?	Signs and symptoms of this include: Warm skin, Tachycardia, and, low blood pressure.   Treatment for this includes: Transporting promptly, administering oxygen en route, providing full ventilatory support, keeping the patient warm, and considering elevating the legs.
Signs and symptoms of this include: Warm skin, Tachycardia, and, low blood pressure.   Treatment for this includes: Transporting promptly, administering oxygen en route, providing full ventilatory support, keeping the patient warm, and considering elevating the legs.	What are the signs and symptoms of septic shock, and how should you treat it?
What are the signs and symptoms of neurogenic shock, and how should you treat it?	Signs and symptoms of this include: Bradycardia, Low blood pressure, and, Signs of neck injury.   Treatment of this includes: Securing the airway, stabilizing the spine, assisting ventilations, administering high-flow oxygen, preserving body heat, and, transporting promptly.
Signs and symptoms of this include: Bradycardia, Low blood pressure, and, Signs of neck injury.   Treatment of this includes: Securing the airway, stabilizing the spine, assisting ventilations, administering high-flow oxygen, preserving body heat, and, transporting promptly.	What are the signs and symptoms of neurogenic shock, and how should you treat it?
What are the signs and symptoms of anaphylactic shock, and how should you treat it?	Signs and symptoms of this include: Mild itching or rash, Burning skin, Vascular dilation, Generalized edema, Coma, and, rapid death.   Treatment for this includes: Managing the airway, Assisting ventilations, administering high-flow oxygen, assisting with administration of epinephrine, and, transporting promptly.
Signs and symptoms of this include: Mild itching or rash, Burning skin, Vascular dilation, Generalized edema, Coma, and, rapid death.   Treatment for this includes: Managing the airway, Assisting ventilations, administering high-flow oxygen, assisting with administration of epinephrine, and, transporting promptly.	What are the signs and symptoms of anaphylactic shock, and how should you treat it?
What are the signs and symptoms of psychogenic shock, and how should you treat it?	Signs and symptoms of this include: A rapid pulse, and, Normal or low blood pressure.   Treatment for this includes: Determining the duration of unconsciousness, Recording initial vitals and mental status, Suspecting head trauma if the patient is confused or slow to regain consciousness, and, Transporting promptly.
Signs and symptoms of this include: A rapid pulse, and, Normal or low blood pressure.   Treatment for this includes: Determining the duration of unconsciousness, Recording initial vitals and mental status, Suspecting head trauma if the patient is confused or slow to regain consciousness, and, Transporting promptly.	What are the signs and symptoms of psychogenic shock, and how should you treat it?
What are the signs and symptoms of hypovolemic shock, and how should you treat it?	Signs and symptoms of this include: A rapid, weak pulse, Low blood pressure, A change in mental status, Cyanosis of the lips and / or nails, Cool, clammy skin, and, An increased respiratory rate.   Treatment for this includes: Securing the airway, Administering high-flow oxygen, Controlling external bleeding, Keeping the patient warm, Possibly elevating the legs, and, Transporting promptly.
Signs and symptoms of this include: A rapid, weak pulse, Low blood pressure, A change in mental status, Cyanosis of the lips and / or nails, Cool, clammy skin, and, An increased respiratory rate.   Treatment for this includes: Securing the airway, Administering high-flow oxygen, Controlling external bleeding, Keeping the patient warm, Possibly elevating the legs, and, Transporting promptly.	What are the signs and symptoms of hypovolemic shock, and how should you treat it?
How should you treat tension pneumothorax?	Treat this with high-flow oxygen via non-re-breathing mask. Be cautious about providing positive-pressure ventilation to a patient with this condition. Usually the only action that can prevent eventual death from this is decompression of the injured side of the chest. This can be performed by ALS personnel.
Treat this with high-flow oxygen via non-re-breathing mask. Be cautious about providing positive-pressure ventilation to a patient with this condition. Usually the only action that can prevent eventual death from this is decompression of the injured side of the chest. This can be performed by ALS personnel.	How should you treat tension pneumothorax?
What position should you place patients with neurogenic shock?	With these patients, slight elevation of the foot end spine board may help bring the blood that is pooling in the vessels of the legs to the vital organs. Placing the patient's arms across his or her chest without moving the spine will also return some pooled blood.
With these patients, slight elevation of the foot end spine board may help bring the blood that is pooling in the vessels of the legs to the vital organs. Placing the patient's arms across his or her chest without moving the spine will also return some pooled blood.	What position should you place patients with neurogenic shock?
When will brain tissue start to die without oxygen?	This will begin to die within 4 to 6 minutes.
This will begin to die within 4 to 6 minutes.	When will brain tissue start to die without oxygen?
What anatomic structures make up the upper airway?	The nose, mouth, jaw, oral cavity, pharynx, and larynx are located here.
The nose, mouth, jaw, oral cavity, pharynx, and larynx are located here.	What anatomic structures make up the upper airway?
What is the major function of the upper airway?	The major function of this is to: Warm, filter, and humidify air as it enters the body.
The major function of this is to: Warm, filter, and humidify air as it enters the body.	What is the major function of the upper airway?
What is the pharynx and what is it composed of?	This is a muscular tube that extends from the nose and mouth to the level of the esophagus and trachea. It is composed of the nasopharynx, oropharynx, and the laryngopharynx (A.K.A. the hypopharynx).
This is a muscular tube that extends from the nose and mouth to the level of the esophagus and trachea. It is composed of the nasopharynx, oropharynx, and the laryngopharynx (A.K.A. the hypopharynx).	What is the pharynx and what is it composed of?
What is the lowest portion of the pharynx?	This is the laryngopharynx. At its base, it splits into two lumens, the larynx anteriorly, and the esophagus posteriorly.
This is the laryngopharynx. At its base, it splits into two lumens, the larynx anteriorly, and the esophagus posteriorly.	What is the lowest portion of the pharynx?
What is the nasopharynx?	This is formed by the union of the facial bones, and is lined with a cilated mucous membrane that keeps contaminants such as dust and other small particles out of the respiratory tract. The membrane also warms and humidifies air as it enters the body.
This is formed by the union of the facial bones, and is lined with a cilated mucous membrane that keeps contaminants such as dust and other small particles out of the respiratory tract. The membrane also warms and humidifies air as it enters the body.	What is the nasopharynx?
What is the oropharynx?	This forms the posterior portion of the oral cavity, which is bordered superiorly by the hard and soft palates, laterally by the cheeks, and inferiorly by the tongue.
This forms the posterior portion of the oral cavity, which is bordered superiorly by the hard and soft palates, laterally by the cheeks, and inferiorly by the tongue.	What is the oropharynx?
What is the larynx?	This marks where the upper airway ends and the lower airway begins.
This marks where the upper airway ends and the lower airway begins.	What is the larynx?
What is the thyroid cartilage?	"This is a shield-shaped structure formed by two plates that join in a ""V"" shape anteriorly to form the larnygeal prominence known as the Adam's apple."
"This is a shield-shaped structure formed by two plates that join in a ""V"" shape anteriorly to form the larnygeal prominence known as the Adam's apple."	What is the thyroid cartilage?
What is the cricoid cartilage?	This lies inferiorly to the thyroid cartilage; it forms the lowest portion of the larynx. It is the only airway structure that forms a complete ring.
This lies inferiorly to the thyroid cartilage; it forms the lowest portion of the larynx. It is the only airway structure that forms a complete ring.	What is the cricoid cartilage?
What is the glottis?	This is space in between the vocal cords and the narrowest portion of the adult's airway.
This is space in between the vocal cords and the narrowest portion of the adult's airway.	What is the glottis?
What is the trachea?	This is the conduit for air entry into the lungs. It is approximately 10 to 12 centimeters in length and consists of C-shaped cartilaginous rings. It descends anteriorly into the thoracic cavity.
This is the conduit for air entry into the lungs. It is approximately 10 to 12 centimeters in length and consists of C-shaped cartilaginous rings. It descends anteriorly into the thoracic cavity.	What is the trachea?
What is the carina?	This is the point at which the trachea bifurcates into the left and right mainstream bronchi.
This is the point at which the trachea bifurcates into the left and right mainstream bronchi.	What is the carina?
What is visceral pleura?	This is a thin, slippery outer membrane that covers all lung tissue.
This is a thin, slippery outer membrane that covers all lung tissue.	What is visceral pleura?
What is the parietal pleura?	This lines the inside of the thoracic cavity.
This lines the inside of the thoracic cavity.	What is the parietal pleura?
What lies between the visceral pleura and the parietal pleura?	Between these is a small amount of fluid, which serves as a lubricant to prevent friction during breathing.
Between these is a small amount of fluid, which serves as a lubricant to prevent friction during breathing.	What lies between the visceral pleura and the parietal pleura?
What should you remember about children's airways?	With these patients' airway, remember that: They have a proportionately smaller mandible and a proportionately larger tongue, both of which increase the incidence of airway obstruction. They have a proportionately larger occipital lobe, so when positioning the airway, place a folded towel under the shoulders to maintain a neutral position. In general, the airway of these patients are smaller and narrower at all levels.
With these patients' airway, remember that: They have a proportionately smaller mandible and a proportionately larger tongue, both of which increase the incidence of airway obstruction. They have a proportionately larger occipital lobe, so when positioning the airway, place a folded towel under the shoulders to maintain a neutral position. In general, the airway of these patients are smaller and narrower at all levels.	What should you remember about children's airways?
What is the mediastinum?	This is the space between the lungs, and is surrounded by tough, connective tissue. This space contains the heart, great vessels, esophagus, trachea, major bronchi, and nerves.
This is the space between the lungs, and is surrounded by tough, connective tissue. This space contains the heart, great vessels, esophagus, trachea, major bronchi, and nerves.	What is the mediastinum?
What is the phrenic nerve?	This is one of the most important nervous structures in the body. It innervates the diaphragm muscle.
This is one of the most important nervous structures in the body. It innervates the diaphragm muscle.	What is the phrenic nerve?
What is ventilation?	This is the physical act of moving air into and out of the lungs.
This is the physical act of moving air into and out of the lungs.	What is ventilation?
What is oxygenation?	This is the process of loading oxygen molecules onto hemoglobin molecules in the bloodstream.
This is the process of loading oxygen molecules onto hemoglobin molecules in the bloodstream.	What is oxygenation?
What is respiration?	This is the actual exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide in the alveoli as well as the tissues of the body.
This is the actual exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide in the alveoli as well as the tissues of the body.	What is respiration?
What is inhalation?	This is the active, muscular part of breathing.
This is the active, muscular part of breathing.	What is inhalation?
How much air does 1 breath draw in?	This is approximately 500 ml in an adult.
This is approximately 500 ml in an adult.	How much air does 1 breath draw in?
What is partial pressure?	This is the term used to describe the amount of gas in air or dissolved in fluid, such as blood. It is measured in millimeters of mercury (Hg).
This is the term used to describe the amount of gas in air or dissolved in fluid, such as blood. It is measured in millimeters of mercury (Hg).	What is partial pressure?
What is the partial pressure of oxygen in air in the alveoli?	This pressure is 104 mm Hg.
This pressure is 104 mm Hg.	What is the partial pressure of oxygen in air in the alveoli?
What is the partial pressure of carbon dioxide in air in the alveoli?	This pressure is 40 mm Hg.
This pressure is 40 mm Hg.	What is the partial pressure of carbon dioxide in air in the alveoli?
What is alveolar ventilation, and how is it determined?	This is the volume of air that reaches the alveoli, and is determined by subtracting the amount of dead space air from the tidal volume.
This is the volume of air that reaches the alveoli, and is determined by subtracting the amount of dead space air from the tidal volume.	What is alveolar ventilation, and how is it determined?
What is tidal volume?	This is the amount of air that is moved into or out of the lungs during a single breath. The average volume for an adult man is approximately 500 ml.
This is the amount of air that is moved into or out of the lungs during a single breath. The average volume for an adult man is approximately 500 ml.	What is tidal volume?
What is dead space?	This is the portion of tidal volume that does not reach the alveoli and thus does not participate in gas exchange. It contains the air that remains in the mouth, nose, trachea, bronchi, and larger bronchioles. This can add up to approximately 150 mL in adults.
This is the portion of tidal volume that does not reach the alveoli and thus does not participate in gas exchange. It contains the air that remains in the mouth, nose, trachea, bronchi, and larger bronchioles. This can add up to approximately 150 mL in adults.	What is dead space?
What is minute ventilation (A.K.A. minute volume)?	This is the amount of air moved through the lungs in 1 minute minus the dead space. An average adult male patient might have a rate of 4200 mL , (12 breaths per minute, a tidal volume of 500 mL per breath, and a dead space of 150 mL)
This is the amount of air moved through the lungs in 1 minute minus the dead space. An average adult male patient might have a rate of 4200 mL , (12 breaths per minute, a tidal volume of 500 mL per breath, and a dead space of 150 mL)	What is minute ventilation (A.K.A. minute volume)?
What is vital capacity?	This refers to the amount of air that can be forcibly expelled from the lungs after breathing deeply.
This refers to the amount of air that can be forcibly expelled from the lungs after breathing deeply.	What is vital capacity?
What is residual volume?	This is the air that remains after maximal expiration. It is approximately 1200 mL in the average adult male.
This is the air that remains after maximal expiration. It is approximately 1200 mL in the average adult male.	What is residual volume?
What is exhalation?	This is the passive part of the breathing process, in which the diaphragm and the intercostal muscles relax, forcing air out of the lungs.
This is the passive part of the breathing process, in which the diaphragm and the intercostal muscles relax, forcing air out of the lungs.	What is exhalation?
How are ventilation changes primarily regulated?	These are regulated primarily by the pH of the cerebrospinal fluid, which is directly related to the amount of carbon dioxide dissolved in the plasma portion of the blood.
These are regulated primarily by the pH of the cerebrospinal fluid, which is directly related to the amount of carbon dioxide dissolved in the plasma portion of the blood.	How are ventilation changes primarily regulated?
What is the hypoxic drive?	This is a condition in which chronically low levels of oxygen in the blood stimulate the respiratory drive; it is seen in patients with end-stage C.O.P.D.
This is a condition in which chronically low levels of oxygen in the blood stimulate the respiratory drive; it is seen in patients with end-stage C.O.P.D.	What is the hypoxic drive?
What is C.O.P.D. (A.K.A. Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Diseases)?	"This is when patients have difficulty eliminating carbon dioxide through exhalation; thus, they always have higher levels of carbon dioxide. This potentially alters their drive for breathing. The body uses a ""backup system"", the hypoxic drive, to control breathing. This is different from the primary control of breathing that uses carbon dioxide. Caution should be taken when administering high concentrations of oxygen to these kinds of patients, as providing high concentrations of oxygen over time will increase the amount of oxygen dissolved in plasma; this could potentially negatively affect their body's drive to breathe."
"This is when patients have difficulty eliminating carbon dioxide through exhalation; thus, they always have higher levels of carbon dioxide. This potentially alters their drive for breathing. The body uses a ""backup system"", the hypoxic drive, to control breathing. This is different from the primary control of breathing that uses carbon dioxide. Caution should be taken when administering high concentrations of oxygen to these kinds of patients, as providing high concentrations of oxygen over time will increase the amount of oxygen dissolved in plasma; this could potentially negatively affect their body's drive to breathe."	What is C.O.P.D. (A.K.A. Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Diseases)?
What is dyspnea?	This is shortness of breath.
This is shortness of breath.	What is dyspnea?
What is another name for metabolism?	Another name for this is cellular respiration.
Another name for this is cellular respiration.	What is another name for metabolism?
What is the chemical composition of air on average?	On average, the chemical composition of this is about 21% oxygen, 78% nitrogen, and 0.3% carbon dioxide.
On average, the chemical composition of this is about 21% oxygen, 78% nitrogen, and 0.3% carbon dioxide.	What is the chemical composition of air on average?
What is surfactant?	This is a liquid protein substance that coats the alveoli in the lungs, decreases alveolar surface tension, and keeps the alveoli expanded; a low level in a premature infant contributes to respiratory distress syndrome.
This is a liquid protein substance that coats the alveoli in the lungs, decreases alveolar surface tension, and keeps the alveoli expanded; a low level in a premature infant contributes to respiratory distress syndrome.	What is surfactant?
Under normal conditions, what percentage of hemoglobin receptor sites contain oxygen?	Under normal conditions, 96% to 100% of these contain oxygen.
Under normal conditions, 96% to 100% of these contain oxygen.	Under normal conditions, what percentage of hemoglobin receptor sites contain oxygen?
What is aerobic respiration?	This can proceed only in the presence of oxygen.  Energy in the form of adenosine triphosphate (A.K.A., A.T.P.) is produced through a series of processes known as the Krebs cycle and oxidative phosphorylation. Together, these chemical processes yield nearly 40 molecules of energy-rich ATP for each molecule of glucose metabolized.
This can proceed only in the presence of oxygen.  Energy in the form of adenosine triphosphate (A.K.A., A.T.P.) is produced through a series of processes known as the Krebs cycle and oxidative phosphorylation. Together, these chemical processes yield nearly 40 molecules of energy-rich ATP for each molecule of glucose metabolized.	What is aerobic respiration?
What are chemoreceptors?	These monitor the levels of O2, CO2, and the pH of the cerebrospinal fluid and then provide feedback to the respiratory centers to modify the rate and depth of breathing based on the body's needs at any given time.
These monitor the levels of O2, CO2, and the pH of the cerebrospinal fluid and then provide feedback to the respiratory centers to modify the rate and depth of breathing based on the body's needs at any given time.	What are chemoreceptors?
How will an elevation in carbon dioxide levels affect the pH balance in CSF?	This will decrease the pH of the cerebrospinal fluid.
This will decrease the pH of the cerebrospinal fluid.	How will an elevation in carbon dioxide levels affect the pH balance in CSF?
What is the normal resting minute ventilation?	The normal rate of this is approximately 6000 mL per minute. About a third of this volume fills dead space; therefore, resting alveolar ventilation is approximately 4000 mL per minute.
The normal rate of this is approximately 6000 mL per minute. About a third of this volume fills dead space; therefore, resting alveolar ventilation is approximately 4000 mL per minute.	What is the normal resting minute ventilation?
What is intrapulmonary shunting?	This is the bypassing of oxygen-poor blood past nonfunctional alveoli to the left side of the heart, inhibiting diffusion and perfusion.
This is the bypassing of oxygen-poor blood past nonfunctional alveoli to the left side of the heart, inhibiting diffusion and perfusion.	What is intrapulmonary shunting?
What is a bag-mask device?	This is a device with a one-way valve and a face mask attached to a ventilation bag; when attached to a reservoir and connected to oxygen, this delivers more than 90% supplemental oxygen.
This is a device with a one-way valve and a face mask attached to a ventilation bag; when attached to a reservoir and connected to oxygen, this delivers more than 90% supplemental oxygen.	What is a bag-mask device?
What is the normal respiratory rate of adults?	For this group, the average respiratory rate is 12 to 20 breaths per minute.
For this group, the average respiratory rate is 12 to 20 breaths per minute.	What is the normal respiratory rate of adults?
What is the normal respiratory rate of children?	The normal respiratory rate of this group is 15 to 30 breaths per minute.
The normal respiratory rate of this group is 15 to 30 breaths per minute.	What is the normal respiratory rate of children?
What is the normal respiratory rate of infants?	The normal respiratory rate of this group is 25 to 50 breaths per minute.
The normal respiratory rate of this group is 25 to 50 breaths per minute.	What is the normal respiratory rate of infants?
What are retractions?	This is when the skin pulls in around the ribs or above the clavicle during respiration. It is a sign of inadequate breathing.
This is when the skin pulls in around the ribs or above the clavicle during respiration. It is a sign of inadequate breathing.	What are retractions?
What are agonal gasps?	These are occasional gasping breaths that occur after the heart has stopped. They occur when the respiratory center in the brain continues to send signals to the respiratory muscles.
These are occasional gasping breaths that occur after the heart has stopped. They occur when the respiratory center in the brain continues to send signals to the respiratory muscles.	What are agonal gasps?
What are Cheyne-Stokes respirations?	This is an irregular respiratory pattern in which the patient breathes with an increasing rate and depth of respirations that is followed by a period of apnea, or lack of spontaneous breathing, followed again by a pattern of increasing rate and depth of respiration.
This is an irregular respiratory pattern in which the patient breathes with an increasing rate and depth of respirations that is followed by a period of apnea, or lack of spontaneous breathing, followed again by a pattern of increasing rate and depth of respiration.	What are Cheyne-Stokes respirations?
What is ataxic respirations?	This is a pattern of irregular, ineffective respirations that may or may not have an identifiable pattern.
This is a pattern of irregular, ineffective respirations that may or may not have an identifiable pattern.	What is ataxic respirations?
What are Kussmaul respirations?	This is an irregular breathing pattern characterized as deep, gasping respirations commonly seen in patients with metabolic acidosis.
This is an irregular breathing pattern characterized as deep, gasping respirations commonly seen in patients with metabolic acidosis.	What are Kussmaul respirations?
What maneuver should you use on a patient if you suspect a cervical spine injury to open the airway?	In this situation, use the the jaw-thrust maneuver.
In this situation, use the the jaw-thrust maneuver.	What maneuver should you use on a patient if you suspect a cervical spine injury to open the airway?
What are the principle purposes of an oropharyngeal airway?	The principle purposes of this are to: 1) Keep the tongue from blocking the upper airway. and 2) Make it easier to suction the the oropharynx if necessary.
The principle purposes of this are to: 1) Keep the tongue from blocking the upper airway. and 2) Make it easier to suction the the oropharynx if necessary.	What are the principle purposes of an oropharyngeal airway?
What is the only acceptable method of inserting an oral airway in children?	With this group, the only acceptable method of inserting an oral airway is to use a tongue blade to hold the tongue down.
With this group, the only acceptable method of inserting an oral airway is to use a tongue blade to hold the tongue down.	What is the only acceptable method of inserting an oral airway in children?
When should you consult medical control about inserting a nasopharyngeal airway?	You should consult medical control about this when a patient has sustained severe trauma to the head or face.
You should consult medical control about this when a patient has sustained severe trauma to the head or face.	When should you consult medical control about inserting a nasopharyngeal airway?
How much airflow and vacuum should a suctioning unit be able to generate?	This should generate airflow of more than 40 L per minute, and a vacuum of more than 300 mm Hg when the tubing is clamped.
This should generate airflow of more than 40 L per minute, and a vacuum of more than 300 mm Hg when the tubing is clamped.	How much airflow and vacuum should a suctioning unit be able to generate?
What is a suction catheter?	This is a hollow cylindrical device used to remove fluid from the patient's airway.
This is a hollow cylindrical device used to remove fluid from the patient's airway.	What is a suction catheter?
How long should you suction a patient's mouth or nose?	You should never do this for more than 15 seconds at a time for adults, 10 seconds for children, and 5 for infants.
You should never do this for more than 15 seconds at a time for adults, 10 seconds for children, and 5 for infants.	How long should you suction a patient's mouth or nose?
What is the recovery position?	This position is used to maintain a clear airway in an unconscious patient who is not injured and is breathing on his or her own with a normal respiratory rate and adequate tidal volume. The patient is rolled onto their left sidewith a hand underneath the head for support. Never put a patient in this position if you suspect spinal trauma.
This position is used to maintain a clear airway in an unconscious patient who is not injured and is breathing on his or her own with a normal respiratory rate and adequate tidal volume. The patient is rolled onto their left sidewith a hand underneath the head for support. Never put a patient in this position if you suspect spinal trauma.	What is the recovery position?
What is the pin-indexing system?	This is a system established for portable cylinders to ensure that a regulator is not connected to a cylinder containing the wrong type of gas.
This is a system established for portable cylinders to ensure that a regulator is not connected to a cylinder containing the wrong type of gas.	What is the pin-indexing system?
What is the flow rate and percent of oxygen delivered for a nasal cannula?	This device has a flow rate of 1000 to 6000 mL per minute, and delivers 24% to 44% oxygen.
This device has a flow rate of 1000 to 6000 mL per minute, and delivers 24% to 44% oxygen.	What is the flow rate and percent of oxygen delivered for a nasal cannula?
What is the flow rate and percent of oxygen delivered for a nonre-breathing mask?	This device has a flow rate of 10 to 15 L per minute, and delivers up to 90% oxygen.
This device has a flow rate of 10 to 15 L per minute, and delivers up to 90% oxygen.	What is the flow rate and percent of oxygen delivered for a nonre-breathing mask?
What is the flow rate and percent of oxygen delivered for a bag-mask device with reservoir?	This device has a flow rate of 15 litres per minute, and delivers nearly 100% oxygen.
This device has a flow rate of 15 litres per minute, and delivers nearly 100% oxygen.	What is the flow rate and percent of oxygen delivered for a bag-mask device with reservoir?
What is the flow rate and percent of oxygen delivered for a mouth-to-mask device?	This device has a flow rate of 15 litres per minute, and delivers nearly 55% oxygen.
This device has a flow rate of 15 litres per minute, and delivers nearly 55% oxygen.	What is the flow rate and percent of oxygen delivered for a mouth-to-mask device?
What is a partial rebreathing mask?	This is similar to a nonrebreathing mask except that there is no one-way valve between the mask and reservoir. Consequently, patients rebreathe a small amount of their exhaled air. This is advantageous for patients who you think are suffering from hyperventilation syndrome. You can easily convert a nonrebreathing mask to this by removing the one-way valve between the mask and the reservoir bag.
This is similar to a nonrebreathing mask except that there is no one-way valve between the mask and reservoir. Consequently, patients rebreathe a small amount of their exhaled air. This is advantageous for patients who you think are suffering from hyperventilation syndrome. You can easily convert a nonrebreathing mask to this by removing the one-way valve between the mask and the reservoir bag.	What is a partial rebreathing mask?
What is the nature of air movement in normal ventilation versus positive-pressure ventilation?	Regarding this, in normal ventilation: air is sucked into the lungs due to the negative intrathoracic created when the diaphragm contracts. Whereas in positive-pressure ventilation: Air is forced into the lungs through a means of mechanical ventilation.
Regarding this, in normal ventilation: air is sucked into the lungs due to the negative intrathoracic created when the diaphragm contracts. Whereas in positive-pressure ventilation: Air is forced into the lungs through a means of mechanical ventilation.	What is the nature of air movement in normal ventilation versus positive-pressure ventilation?
What is the nature of blood movement in normal ventilation versus positive-pressure ventilation?	Regarding this, in normal ventilation: Normal breathing allows blood to naturally be pulled back to the heart. Whereas in positive-pressure ventilation: Intrathoracic pressure is increased, not allowing blood to be adequately pulled back to the heart. This causes the amount of blood pumnped by the heart to be reduced.
Regarding this, in normal ventilation: Normal breathing allows blood to naturally be pulled back to the heart. Whereas in positive-pressure ventilation: Intrathoracic pressure is increased, not allowing blood to be adequately pulled back to the heart. This causes the amount of blood pumnped by the heart to be reduced.	What is the nature of blood movement in normal ventilation versus positive-pressure ventilation?
What is the nature of airway wall pressure in normal ventilation versus positive-pressure ventilation?	Regarding this, in normal ventilation: This is not affected during normal breathing. Whereas in positive-pressure ventilation: More volume is required to have the same effects as normal breathing. As a result, the walls are pushed out of their normal anatomic shape.
Regarding this, in normal ventilation: This is not affected during normal breathing. Whereas in positive-pressure ventilation: More volume is required to have the same effects as normal breathing. As a result, the walls are pushed out of their normal anatomic shape.	What is the nature of airway wall pressure in normal ventilation versus positive-pressure ventilation?
What is the nature of esophageal opening pressure in normal ventilation versus positive-pressure ventilation?	Regarding this, in normal ventilation: This is not affected during normal breathing. Whereas in positive-pressure ventilation: Air is forced into the stomach, causing gastric distention that could result in vomiting and aspiration.
Regarding this, in normal ventilation: This is not affected during normal breathing. Whereas in positive-pressure ventilation: Air is forced into the stomach, causing gastric distention that could result in vomiting and aspiration.	What is the nature of esophageal opening pressure in normal ventilation versus positive-pressure ventilation?
What is the nature of overventilation in normal ventilation versus positive-pressure ventilation?	Regarding this, in normal ventilation: This is not typical of normal breathing. Whereas in positive-pressure ventilation: Forcing volume and rate results in increased intrathoracic pressure, gastric distention, and a decrease in cardiac output.
Regarding this, in normal ventilation: This is not typical of normal breathing. Whereas in positive-pressure ventilation: Forcing volume and rate results in increased intrathoracic pressure, gastric distention, and a decrease in cardiac output.	What is the nature of overventilation in normal ventilation versus positive-pressure ventilation?
For apneic patients with a pulse, what is the ventilation rate in adults?	For these patients, the rate is 1 breath every 5 to 6 seconds.
For these patients, the rate is 1 breath every 5 to 6 seconds.	For apneic patients with a pulse, what is the ventilation rate in adults?
For apneic patients with a pulse, what is the ventilation rate in children and infants?	For these patients, the rate is 1 breath every 3 to 5 seconds.
For these patients, the rate is 1 breath every 3 to 5 seconds.	For apneic patients with a pulse, what is the ventilation rate in children and infants?
When should you use a bag-mask device?	This should be used when you need to deliver high concentrations of oxygen to patients who not ventilating adequately. The device is also used for patients in respiratory arrest, cardiopulmonary arrest, and respiratory failure. You should use an oral or nasal airway adjunct.
This should be used when you need to deliver high concentrations of oxygen to patients who not ventilating adequately. The device is also used for patients in respiratory arrest, cardiopulmonary arrest, and respiratory failure. You should use an oral or nasal airway adjunct.	When should you use a bag-mask device?
What is the volume capability of the adult bag-mask device?	The volume capability for this device is 1200 to 1600 mL.
The volume capability for this device is 1200 to 1600 mL.	What is the volume capability of the adult bag-mask device?
What is the volume capability of the pediatric bag-mask device?	The volume capability of this device is 500 to 700 mL.
The volume capability of this device is 500 to 700 mL.	What is the volume capability of the pediatric bag-mask device?
What is the volume capability of the infant bag-mask device?	The volume capability of this device is 150 to 240 mL.
The volume capability of this device is 150 to 240 mL.	What is the volume capability of the infant bag-mask device?
What is a manually triggered ventilation device, AKA a flow-restricted, oxygen-powered ventilation device?	This is a fixed flow/rate ventilation device that delivers a breath every time its button is pushed. The major advantage of this device is that it allows a single rescuer to use both hand to maintain a mask-to-face seal.
This is a fixed flow/rate ventilation device that delivers a breath every time its button is pushed. The major advantage of this device is that it allows a single rescuer to use both hand to maintain a mask-to-face seal.	What is a manually triggered ventilation device, AKA a flow-restricted, oxygen-powered ventilation device?
What is compliance?	This is the ability of the alveoli to expand when air is drawn in during inhalation.
This is the ability of the alveoli to expand when air is drawn in during inhalation.	What is compliance?
What is CPAP, AKA, Continuous Positive Airway Pressure?	This is a noninvasive means of providing ventilatory support for patients experiencing respiratory distress. Indications for this include: Patient must be alert and able to follow commands. Patient is displaying obvious signs of moderate to severe respiratory distress from an underlying pathology, such as pulmonary edema or obstructive pulmonary disease. The patient is breathing rapidly, such that it affects over-all minute volume. And, Pulse oximetry reading is less than 90%.   Contraindications include: A patient who is in respiratory arrest. Signs and symptoms of a pneumothorax or chest trauma. Tracheostomy. Active gastrointestinal bleeding or vomiting. And, The patient is unable to follow verbal commands.
This is a noninvasive means of providing ventilatory support for patients experiencing respiratory distress. Indications for this include: Patient must be alert and able to follow commands. Patient is displaying obvious signs of moderate to severe respiratory distress from an underlying pathology, such as pulmonary edema or obstructive pulmonary disease. The patient is breathing rapidly, such that it affects over-all minute volume. And, Pulse oximetry reading is less than 90%.   Contraindications include: A patient who is in respiratory arrest. Signs and symptoms of a pneumothorax or chest trauma. Tracheostomy. Active gastrointestinal bleeding or vomiting. And, The patient is unable to follow verbal commands.	What is CPAP, AKA, Continuous Positive Airway Pressure?
What are the steps in the assessment process?	This is divided into five main parts: 1) Scene size-up. 2) Primary assessment. 3) History taking. 4) Secondary assessment. 5) Reassessment
This is divided into five main parts: 1) Scene size-up. 2) Primary assessment. 3) History taking. 4) Secondary assessment. 5) Reassessment	What are the steps in the assessment process?
Whether you are assessing a medical patient or trauma patient, what is the key in both situations?	The key to both of these situations, whether medical or trauma, is to remain organized.
The key to both of these situations, whether medical or trauma, is to remain organized.	Whether you are assessing a medical patient or trauma patient, what is the key in both situations?
How is the underlying condition or problem of a patient often revealed to you?	It is frequently a combination of many signs and symptoms that reveals this to you.
It is frequently a combination of many signs and symptoms that reveals this to you.	How is the underlying condition or problem of a patient often revealed to you?
What is a symptom?	This is a subjective condition that the patient feels and tells you about.
This is a subjective condition that the patient feels and tells you about.	What is a symptom?
What is a sign?	This is an objective condition that you can observe about the patient.
This is an objective condition that you can observe about the patient.	What is a sign?
What is the minimum appropriate visibility gear?	This is an American National Standards Institute 207 certified high-visibility public safety vest.
This is an American National Standards Institute 207 certified high-visibility public safety vest.	What is the minimum appropriate visibility gear?
What is the way you typically leave a scene?	This is typically the exact same way you entered the scene.
This is typically the exact same way you entered the scene.	What is the way you typically leave a scene?
What is an important consideration for your patients in severe environmental conditions?	With this, remember: You are obliged to provide protection for the patient. Consider the scene factors.
With this, remember: You are obliged to provide protection for the patient. Consider the scene factors.	What is an important consideration for your patients in severe environmental conditions?
What is mechanism of injury?	This is the way in which traumatic injuries occur; the forces that act on the body to cause damage.
This is the way in which traumatic injuries occur; the forces that act on the body to cause damage.	What is mechanism of injury?
What is the difference between 1) blunt trauma and 2) penetrating trauma?	With the first, the force of the injury occurs over a broad area, and the skin is usually not broken. However, the tissues and organs below the area of impact may be damaged. With the second, the force of the injury occurs at a small point of contact between the skin and the object. The object pierces the skin and creates an open wound that carries a high potential for infection.
With the first, the force of the injury occurs over a broad area, and the skin is usually not broken. However, the tissues and organs below the area of impact may be damaged. With the second, the force of the injury occurs at a small point of contact between the skin and the object. The object pierces the skin and creates an open wound that carries a high potential for infection.	What is the difference between 1) blunt trauma and 2) penetrating trauma?
What is nature of illness (NOI), how should you determine it, and what are some examples of it?	This is the general type of illness a patient is experiencing. To quickly determine it, talk with the patient, family, or bystanders about the problem. But at the same time, use your senses to check the scene for clues as to the possible problem. Examples of it include seizures, heart attacks, diabetic problems, and poisonings.
This is the general type of illness a patient is experiencing. To quickly determine it, talk with the patient, family, or bystanders about the problem. But at the same time, use your senses to check the scene for clues as to the possible problem. Examples of it include seizures, heart attacks, diabetic problems, and poisonings.	What is nature of illness (NOI), how should you determine it, and what are some examples of it?
What is Personal Protective Equipment (AKA PPE)?	This is clothing or specialized equipment that provides protection to the wearer. Which type to use will depend on the specific job duties required during a patient care interaction.
This is clothing or specialized equipment that provides protection to the wearer. Which type to use will depend on the specific job duties required during a patient care interaction.	What is Personal Protective Equipment (AKA PPE)?
What are standard precautions?	These are protective measures that have traditionally been developed by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention for use in dealing with objects, blood, body fluids, and other potential exposure risks of communicable disease.
These are protective measures that have traditionally been developed by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention for use in dealing with objects, blood, body fluids, and other potential exposure risks of communicable disease.	What are standard precautions?
What is the incident command system?	This is a system implemented to manage disasters and mass-casualty incidents in which section chiefs - including finance, logistics, operations, and planning - report to the incident commander.
This is a system implemented to manage disasters and mass-casualty incidents in which section chiefs - including finance, logistics, operations, and planning - report to the incident commander.	What is the incident command system?
What is triage?	This is the process of sorting patients based on the severity of each patient's condition.
This is the process of sorting patients based on the severity of each patient's condition.	What is triage?
What is primary assessment, and what are its stages?	This is the second step in patient assessment. It begins when you greet your patient, and has a single goal: to identify and initiate treatment of immediate or potential life threats. It stages are: 1) Form a general impression. 2) Assess level of consciousness 3) Assess the airway: identify and treat life threats. 4) Assess the breathing: identify and treat life threats. 5) Assess circulation: identify and treat life threats. 6) Perform rapid scan. And 7) Determine priority of patient care and transport.
This is the second step in patient assessment. It begins when you greet your patient, and has a single goal: to identify and initiate treatment of immediate or potential life threats. It stages are: 1) Form a general impression. 2) Assess level of consciousness 3) Assess the airway: identify and treat life threats. 4) Assess the breathing: identify and treat life threats. 5) Assess circulation: identify and treat life threats. 6) Perform rapid scan. And 7) Determine priority of patient care and transport.	What is primary assessment, and what are its stages?
What is orientation?	This tests mental status by checking a patient's memory and thinking ability. The most common ways to evaluate this in a patient is to test the patient's ability to remember: 1) Person - Remembering his or her name. 2) Place - Identifying the current location. 3) Time - Identifying the current year, month, and approximate date. 4) Event - Describing what happened (the MOI or NOI)
This tests mental status by checking a patient's memory and thinking ability. The most common ways to evaluate this in a patient is to test the patient's ability to remember: 1) Person - Remembering his or her name. 2) Place - Identifying the current location. 3) Time - Identifying the current year, month, and approximate date. 4) Event - Describing what happened (the MOI or NOI)	What is orientation?
On the Glascow Coma Scale, what are the scores for eye opening?	On this scale: 4) Spontaneous opening. 3) In response to speech. 2) In response to pain 1) None
On this scale: 4) Spontaneous opening. 3) In response to speech. 2) In response to pain 1) None	On the Glascow Coma Scale, what are the scores for eye opening?
On the Glascow Coma Scale, what are the scores for verbal response?	On this scale: 5) Oriented conversation. 4) Confused conversation. 3) Inappropriate words. 2) Incomprehensible sounds. 1) None
On this scale: 5) Oriented conversation. 4) Confused conversation. 3) Inappropriate words. 2) Incomprehensible sounds. 1) None	On the Glascow Coma Scale, what are the scores for verbal response?
On the Glascow Coma Scale, what are the scores for motor response?	On this scale: 6) Obeys commands. 5) Localizes pain. 4) Withdraws to pain. 3) Abnormal flexion. 2) Abnormal extension. 1) None.
On this scale: 6) Obeys commands. 5) Localizes pain. 4) Withdraws to pain. 3) Abnormal flexion. 2) Abnormal extension. 1) None.	On the Glascow Coma Scale, what are the scores for motor response?
On the Glascow Coma Scale (AKA GCS), what are the score breakdowns?	On this scale: 13-15: May indicate mild dysfunction, although 15 is the score some with no neurologic disabilities would receive. 9-12: May indicate moderate dysfunction. 8 or less: Indicative of severe dysfunction.
On this scale: 13-15: May indicate mild dysfunction, although 15 is the score some with no neurologic disabilities would receive. 9-12: May indicate moderate dysfunction. 8 or less: Indicative of severe dysfunction.	On the Glascow Coma Scale (AKA GCS), what are the score breakdowns?
When a brighter light is introduced in one eye, what should happen?	In this case, both pupils should constrict equally to the appropriate size.
In this case, both pupils should constrict equally to the appropriate size.	When a brighter light is introduced in one eye, what should happen?
What is anisocoria?	This is a condition in which patients exhibit unequal pupil size. If the patient or family cannot confirm the presence of this condition, you must assume the patient has depressed brain function.
This is a condition in which patients exhibit unequal pupil size. If the patient or family cannot confirm the presence of this condition, you must assume the patient has depressed brain function.	What is anisocoria?
What can cause depressed brain function?	This can be caused by: Injury of the brain or brain stem. Trauma or stroke. Brain tumor. Inadequate oxygenation or perfusion. Drugs or toxins (central nervous system depressants)
This can be caused by: Injury of the brain or brain stem. Trauma or stroke. Brain tumor. Inadequate oxygenation or perfusion. Drugs or toxins (central nervous system depressants)	What can cause depressed brain function?
What do opiates do to pupils?	These cause to pupils to constrict so significantly, regardless of light, that they become so small as to be described as pinpoint.
These cause to pupils to constrict so significantly, regardless of light, that they become so small as to be described as pinpoint.	What do opiates do to pupils?
What might ICP do to the pupils?	This might cause sufficient pressure against the oculomotor nerve on one side that the motor commands can no longer pass from the brain to that eye. When this occurs, the eye no longer receives commands to constrict, and its pupil becomes fully dilated and fixed. This is described as a blown pupil.
This might cause sufficient pressure against the oculomotor nerve on one side that the motor commands can no longer pass from the brain to that eye. When this occurs, the eye no longer receives commands to constrict, and its pupil becomes fully dilated and fixed. This is described as a blown pupil.	What might ICP do to the pupils?
What does PEARRL stand for?	This stands for: Pupils, Equal And Round, Regular in size, and react to Light.
This stands for: Pupils, Equal And Round, Regular in size, and react to Light.	What does PEARRL stand for?
What are spontaneous breathing (AKA spontaneous respirations)?	This is when a patient breathes without assistance.
This is when a patient breathes without assistance.	What are spontaneous breathing (AKA spontaneous respirations)?
What is the ratio of inhalation and exhalation times?	These occur in a 1:3 ratio.
These occur in a 1:3 ratio.	What is the ratio of inhalation and exhalation times?
What is the information you must obtain to assess breathing, and what questions should you be asking yourself?	When doing this, you must obtain: Respiratory rate, Rhythm (regular or irregular), Quality or character of breathing, and, Depth of breathing.   You should be asking yourself: Does the patient appear to be choking? Is the rate too fast or too slow? Are the respirations shallow or deep? Is the patient cyanotic? Do you hear abnormal sounds when listening to the lungs? Is the patient moving air into and out of the lungs on both sides?
When doing this, you must obtain: Respiratory rate, Rhythm (regular or irregular), Quality or character of breathing, and, Depth of breathing.   You should be asking yourself: Does the patient appear to be choking? Is the rate too fast or too slow? Are the respirations shallow or deep? Is the patient cyanotic? Do you hear abnormal sounds when listening to the lungs? Is the patient moving air into and out of the lungs on both sides?	What is the information you must obtain to assess breathing, and what questions should you be asking yourself?
A patient who coughs up thick, yellowish, or greenish sputum most likely has what?	Patients with this sign likely have an advanced respiratory infection.
Patients with this sign likely have an advanced respiratory infection.	A patient who coughs up thick, yellowish, or greenish sputum most likely has what?
Where should you auscultate?	Because you can almost always hear a patients breath sounds better from the back, do this there if the back is accessible. Do this over the apices (upper lungs), bases (lower lungs), and over the major airways.
Because you can almost always hear a patients breath sounds better from the back, do this there if the back is accessible. Do this over the apices (upper lungs), bases (lower lungs), and over the major airways.	Where should you auscultate?
What are rales, AKA crackles?	These are wet crackling sounds, usually on both inspiration and expiration.
These are wet crackling sounds, usually on both inspiration and expiration.	What are rales, AKA crackles?
What are rhonchi?	These are congested breath sounds and may suggest the presence of mucus in the lungs. Expect to hear low-pitched, noisy sounds that are most prominent on expiration. The patient often has a productive cough associated with these sounds.
These are congested breath sounds and may suggest the presence of mucus in the lungs. Expect to hear low-pitched, noisy sounds that are most prominent on expiration. The patient often has a productive cough associated with these sounds.	What are rhonchi?
What are the accessory muscles?	These include the neck muscles (sternocleidomastoid), the chest pectoris majors, and the abdominal muscles. They aid in respiration.
These include the neck muscles (sternocleidomastoid), the chest pectoris majors, and the abdominal muscles. They aid in respiration.	What are the accessory muscles?
What is nasal flaring?	This is seen in pediatric patients with inadequate breathing.
This is seen in pediatric patients with inadequate breathing.	What is nasal flaring?
What is the tripod position?	This is when a patient is sitting and leaning forward on outstreched arms with the head and chin thrust slightly forward; it indicates poor breathing.
This is when a patient is sitting and leaning forward on outstreched arms with the head and chin thrust slightly forward; it indicates poor breathing.	What is the tripod position?
What is the sniffing position?	This is commonly seen in children. The patient sits upright with the head and chin thrust slightly forward, and the patient appears to be sniffing.
This is commonly seen in children. The patient sits upright with the head and chin thrust slightly forward, and the patient appears to be sniffing.	What is the sniffing position?
What is the normal pulse rate for infants (1 month to 1 year)?	This is 100 to 160 beats per minute.
This is 100 to 160 beats per minute.	What is the normal pulse rate for infants (1 month to 1 year)?
What is the normal pulse rate for toddlers (1 to 3 years)?	This is 90 to 150 beats per minute.
This is 90 to 150 beats per minute.	What is the normal pulse rate for toddlers (1 to 3 years)?
What is the normal pulse rate for preschool chldren (3 to 6 years)?	This is 80 to 140 beats per minutes.
This is 80 to 140 beats per minutes.	What is the normal pulse rate for preschool chldren (3 to 6 years)?
What is the normal pulse rate for school age children (6 to 12 years)?	This is 70 to 120 beats per minute.
This is 70 to 120 beats per minute.	What is the normal pulse rate for school age children (6 to 12 years)?
What is the normal pulse rate for adolescents (12 to 18 years) and adults?	This is 60 to 100 beats per minute.
This is 60 to 100 beats per minute.	What is the normal pulse rate for adolescents (12 to 18 years) and adults?
What is the sclera?	This is the normally white portion of the eye.
This is the normally white portion of the eye.	What is the sclera?
Where should you determine capillary refill in newborns and young infants?	Press on the forehead, chin, or sternum to determine capillary refill in these patients.
Press on the forehead, chin, or sternum to determine capillary refill in these patients.	Where should you determine capillary refill in newborns and young infants?
How long should the rapid scan of the patient take?	This should take 60 to 90 seconds.
This should take 60 to 90 seconds.	How long should the rapid scan of the patient take?
What conditions are examples of conditions that indicate high-priority patients who need to be transported immediately?	These conditions are: Difficulty breathing, Poor general impression, Unresponsive with no gag or cough reflex, Severe chest pain, Pale skin or other signs of poor perfusion, Uncontrolled bleeding, Responsive but unable to follow commands, Severe pain in any area of the body, Inability to move any part of the body, And, Complicated childbirth.
These conditions are: Difficulty breathing, Poor general impression, Unresponsive with no gag or cough reflex, Severe chest pain, Pale skin or other signs of poor perfusion, Uncontrolled bleeding, Responsive but unable to follow commands, Severe pain in any area of the body, Inability to move any part of the body, And, Complicated childbirth.	What conditions are examples of conditions that indicate high-priority patients who need to be transported immediately?
What is the Golden Period and the Platinum 10?	The first refers to the time from injury to definitive care, during which treatment of shock and traumatic injuries should occur because survival potential is best. Second refers to the ideal time to assess, stabilize, package, and begin transport.
The first refers to the time from injury to definitive care, during which treatment of shock and traumatic injuries should occur because survival potential is best. Second refers to the ideal time to assess, stabilize, package, and begin transport.	What is the Golden Period and the Platinum 10?
Which patients benefit from remaining on scene and receiving continuing care?	An older patient with chest pain administered nitrogylcerin on scene and waiting for an ALS is an example of this.
An older patient with chest pain administered nitrogylcerin on scene and waiting for an ALS is an example of this.	Which patients benefit from remaining on scene and receiving continuing care?
What is the chief complaint?	This is the reason the patient or someone else called 9-1-1
This is the reason the patient or someone else called 9-1-1	What is the chief complaint?
What does NKA stand for?	"This stands for ""No Known Allergies"""
"This stands for ""No Known Allergies"""	What does NKA stand for?
What are pertinent negatives?	These are findings that warrant no care or intervention. They also indicate that a thorough and complete examination and history were performed.
These are findings that warrant no care or intervention. They also indicate that a thorough and complete examination and history were performed.	What are pertinent negatives?
When should you use close-ended questions?	Use these when patients say nothing or very little. Also note their silence is a clue to the patient's chief complaint.
Use these when patients say nothing or very little. Also note their silence is a clue to the patient's chief complaint.	When should you use close-ended questions?
What should you always remember when determing the nature of the chief complaint?	Remember that there may be a number of possible medical or traumatic causes for this.
Remember that there may be a number of possible medical or traumatic causes for this.	What should you always remember when determing the nature of the chief complaint?
What is one of the most common causes of confusion?	One of the most common causes of this is hypoxia.
One of the most common causes of this is hypoxia.	What is one of the most common causes of confusion?
What is one way to deal with hearing impaired patients?	One way to deal with this is to use your stethoscope to function like a hearing aid; have the patient place the stethoscope in his or her ears and speak into the stethoscope bell, which will amplify the sound.
One way to deal with this is to use your stethoscope to function like a hearing aid; have the patient place the stethoscope in his or her ears and speak into the stethoscope bell, which will amplify the sound.	What is one way to deal with hearing impaired patients?
What is the purpose of the secondary assessment?	The purpose of this is to perform a systematic physical examination of the patient. It may be a head-to-toe, full body scan or a systematic assessment that focuses on a a certain area or region of the body.
The purpose of this is to perform a systematic physical examination of the patient. It may be a head-to-toe, full body scan or a systematic assessment that focuses on a a certain area or region of the body.	What is the purpose of the secondary assessment?
What is crepitus?	This is the sound of joints rubbing together.
This is the sound of joints rubbing together.	What is crepitus?
What is a sphygmomanometer?	This is a blood pressure cuff.
This is a blood pressure cuff.	What is a sphygmomanometer?
What is capnography?	This is a noninvasive method that can quickly and efficiently provide information on a patient's ventilatory status, circulation, and metabolism.
This is a noninvasive method that can quickly and efficiently provide information on a patient's ventilatory status, circulation, and metabolism.	What is capnography?
What is capnometry?	This is the use of a capnometer, a device that measures the amount of expired carbon dioxide.
This is the use of a capnometer, a device that measures the amount of expired carbon dioxide.	What is capnometry?
What is a full-body scan?	This is a systematic head-to-toe examination.
This is a systematic head-to-toe examination.	What is a full-body scan?
What is a focused assessment?	This is generally performed on patients who have sustained nonsignificant MOIs or on responsive medical patients. It is based on the chief complaint.
This is generally performed on patients who have sustained nonsignificant MOIs or on responsive medical patients. It is based on the chief complaint.	What is a focused assessment?
What is the normal range for blood pressure in adults?	This is 90 to 140 mm Hg (systolic).
This is 90 to 140 mm Hg (systolic).	What is the normal range for blood pressure in adults?
What is the normal range for blood pressure in children (1 to 8 years old)?	This is 80 to 110 mm Hg (systolic).
This is 80 to 110 mm Hg (systolic).	What is the normal range for blood pressure in children (1 to 8 years old)?
What is the normal range for blood pressure in infants (newborn to 1 year)?	This is 50 to 95 mm Hg (systolic).
This is 50 to 95 mm Hg (systolic).	What is the normal range for blood pressure in infants (newborn to 1 year)?
What is subcutaneous emphysema?	This is a crackling sound produced by air bubbles under the skin.
This is a crackling sound produced by air bubbles under the skin.	What is subcutaneous emphysema?
What is the reassessment phase?	This is performed at regular intervals and is to identify and treat changes in a patient's condition.
This is performed at regular intervals and is to identify and treat changes in a patient's condition.	What is the reassessment phase?
What should you do if the patient's condition improves?	If this happens, continue whatever treatments you are providing.
If this happens, continue whatever treatments you are providing.	What should you do if the patient's condition improves?
What is pharmacology?	This is the science of drugs.
This is the science of drugs.	What is pharmacology?
What is pharmacodynamics?	This is the process by which a medication works on the body.
This is the process by which a medication works on the body.	What is pharmacodynamics?
What is an agonist?	This is a medication that causes stimulation of receptors.
This is a medication that causes stimulation of receptors.	What is an agonist?
What is an antagonist?	This is medication that binds to a receptor and block other medications.
This is medication that binds to a receptor and block other medications.	What is an antagonist?
What is a medication's action?	This is the therapeutic effect or intended effect it is expected to have on the body.
This is the therapeutic effect or intended effect it is expected to have on the body.	What is a medication's action?
What should you remember about doses in the elderly population?	These may also need to be decreased for this population because they cannot process medications as efficiently as others.
These may also need to be decreased for this population because they cannot process medications as efficiently as others.	What should you remember about doses in the elderly population?
What are indication?	These are the reasons or conditions for which a particular medication is given.
These are the reasons or conditions for which a particular medication is given.	What are indication?
What are contraindications?	These are reasons or conditions for which a particular medication should not be given, even if it usually is indicated for that person's condition.
These are reasons or conditions for which a particular medication should not be given, even if it usually is indicated for that person's condition.	What are contraindications?
What are side effects?	These are any actions of a medication other than the desired ones.
These are any actions of a medication other than the desired ones.	What are side effects?
What are unintended effects?	These are the effects that are undesirable but pose little risk to the patient.
These are the effects that are undesirable but pose little risk to the patient.	What are unintended effects?
What are untoward effects?	These are the effects that can be harmful to the patient.
These are the effects that can be harmful to the patient.	What are untoward effects?
What is the difference between a medication's generic name and its trade name?	The first is a simple, clear, nonproprietary name. The second is the brand name; as a proper noun, it begins with a capital letter.
The first is a simple, clear, nonproprietary name. The second is the brand name; as a proper noun, it begins with a capital letter.	What is the difference between a medication's generic name and its trade name?
What are OTC medications?	These are medications that can be purchased without a prescription.
These are medications that can be purchased without a prescription.	What are OTC medications?
What are enteral medications?	These are medications that enter the body through the digestive system.
These are medications that enter the body through the digestive system.	What are enteral medications?
What are parenteral medications?	These are medications that enter the body by a route other than the digestive tract, skin, or mucous membranes. These are absorbed much more quickly and offer a more predictable and measurable dose.
These are medications that enter the body by a route other than the digestive tract, skin, or mucous membranes. These are absorbed much more quickly and offer a more predictable and measurable dose.	What are parenteral medications?
What is absorption?	This is the process by which medications travel through body tissues until they reach the bloodstream.
This is the process by which medications travel through body tissues until they reach the bloodstream.	What is absorption?
What is the per retum (PR) route of administration?	This is medication administrated by the rectum. It is most commonly used with children and patients who cannot swallow or are unconscious.
This is medication administrated by the rectum. It is most commonly used with children and patients who cannot swallow or are unconscious.	What is the per retum (PR) route of administration?
What is the intravenous (IV) route of administration?	This is medication administed into the vein. This is the fastest way to deliver a chemical substance.
This is medication administed into the vein. This is the fastest way to deliver a chemical substance.	What is the intravenous (IV) route of administration?
What is the intraosseous (IO) route of administration?	This is medication delivered into the bone, reaching the bloodstream via the bone marrow. This is very painful, and so this route is used most often in patients who are unconscious as a result of cardiac arrest or extreme shock, as well as children who have fewer available IV sites.
This is medication delivered into the bone, reaching the bloodstream via the bone marrow. This is very painful, and so this route is used most often in patients who are unconscious as a result of cardiac arrest or extreme shock, as well as children who have fewer available IV sites.	What is the intraosseous (IO) route of administration?
What is the subcutaneous (SC or SQ) route of administration?	This is medication delivered beneath the skin as an injection into the tissue between the skin and muscle. Because there is less blood here than in the muscles, medications that are given by this route are generally absorbed more slowly, and their effects last longer. Daily insulin injections for patients with diabetes are given this way, as well as some forms of epinephrine.
This is medication delivered beneath the skin as an injection into the tissue between the skin and muscle. Because there is less blood here than in the muscles, medications that are given by this route are generally absorbed more slowly, and their effects last longer. Daily insulin injections for patients with diabetes are given this way, as well as some forms of epinephrine.	What is the subcutaneous (SC or SQ) route of administration?
What is the intramuscular (IM) route of administration?	This is medication administered into the muscle. Usually, medications given this way are absorbed quickly because muscles have a lot of blood vessels. Possible problems with this method are damage to muscle tissue and uneven, unreliable absorption, especially in people with decreased tissue perfusion. Auto-injectors frequently use this method.
This is medication administered into the muscle. Usually, medications given this way are absorbed quickly because muscles have a lot of blood vessels. Possible problems with this method are damage to muscle tissue and uneven, unreliable absorption, especially in people with decreased tissue perfusion. Auto-injectors frequently use this method.	What is the intramuscular (IM) route of administration?
What is the inhalation route of administration?	This is medication inhaled into the lungs so that they can be absorbed into the bloodstream more quickly, or so they work in the lungs. Generally, this minimizes the effects of the medication in other body tissues.
This is medication inhaled into the lungs so that they can be absorbed into the bloodstream more quickly, or so they work in the lungs. Generally, this minimizes the effects of the medication in other body tissues.	What is the inhalation route of administration?
What is the sublingual (SL) route of administration?	This is medication administered under the tongue. The medication enters through the oral mucosa under the tongue and are absorbed into the bloodstream within minutes. This method is faster than the oral route, and it protects medications from chemicals in the digestive system, such as acids that can weaken or inactivate them.
This is medication administered under the tongue. The medication enters through the oral mucosa under the tongue and are absorbed into the bloodstream within minutes. This method is faster than the oral route, and it protects medications from chemicals in the digestive system, such as acids that can weaken or inactivate them.	What is the sublingual (SL) route of administration?
What is the transcutaneous, or transdermal route of administration?	This is medication administered through the skin, and usually have longer-lasting effects. Nicotine patches or adhesive patches containing nitroglycerin are examples of this.
This is medication administered through the skin, and usually have longer-lasting effects. Nicotine patches or adhesive patches containing nitroglycerin are examples of this.	What is the transcutaneous, or transdermal route of administration?
What is the intranasal (IN) route of administration?	This is medication administered into the nostril, typically via a specialized atomizer device called a Mucosal Atomizer Device (AKA M.A.D.). Blood flow to the head and face is very high; therefore, absorption is rather quick with this route. Naloxone can be administered to some overdose patients via this route.
This is medication administered into the nostril, typically via a specialized atomizer device called a Mucosal Atomizer Device (AKA M.A.D.). Blood flow to the head and face is very high; therefore, absorption is rather quick with this route. Naloxone can be administered to some overdose patients via this route.	What is the intranasal (IN) route of administration?
What is a solution?	This is a liquid mixture of one or more substances that cannot be separated by filtering or allowing the mixture to stand.
This is a liquid mixture of one or more substances that cannot be separated by filtering or allowing the mixture to stand.	What is a solution?
What is a suspension?	This is a mixture of ground particles that are distributed evenly throughout a liquid but do not dissolve. It is very important that you shake or swirl a suspesion before administering it to ensure that the patient receives the right amount of medication.
This is a mixture of ground particles that are distributed evenly throughout a liquid but do not dissolve. It is very important that you shake or swirl a suspesion before administering it to ensure that the patient receives the right amount of medication.	What is a suspension?
What is a metered-dose inhaler (A.K.A. an MDI)?	This is a miniature spray canister used to direct such substances through the mouth and into the lungs. It delivers the same amount of medication each time it is used, and must be shaken vigorously before the medication is administered.
This is a miniature spray canister used to direct such substances through the mouth and into the lungs. It delivers the same amount of medication each time it is used, and must be shaken vigorously before the medication is administered.	What is a metered-dose inhaler (A.K.A. an MDI)?
What are topical medications?	These are lotions, creams, and ointments that are applied to the surface of the skin.
These are lotions, creams, and ointments that are applied to the surface of the skin.	What are topical medications?
"What are the ""Six Rights"" of medication administration?"	These are: 1) Right patient, 2) Right medication, 3) Right dose, 4) Right route, 5) Right time, and 6) Right documentation
These are: 1) Right patient, 2) Right medication, 3) Right dose, 4) Right route, 5) Right time, and 6) Right documentation	"What are the ""Six Rights"" of medication administration?"
What is the echo technique?	This is repeating the order you receive from the physician for the administration of a medication. It is essential that you do this anytime you receive an order from a physician.
This is repeating the order you receive from the physician for the administration of a medication. It is essential that you do this anytime you receive an order from a physician.	What is the echo technique?
What are the 3 circumstances for administering medication?	These are: 1) peer-assisted medication (administering medication to yourself or your partner) 2) patient-assisted medication (assisting the patient with the administration of his or her own medication) and, 3) EMT-administered medication (directly administering the medication to the patient.
These are: 1) peer-assisted medication (administering medication to yourself or your partner) 2) patient-assisted medication (assisting the patient with the administration of his or her own medication) and, 3) EMT-administered medication (directly administering the medication to the patient.	What are the 3 circumstances for administering medication?
What are the medications that may be administered by EMTs (depending of course on local protocol)?	These medications are: Oxygen, Activated charcoal, Oral glucose, Aspirin, Epinephrine auto-injector, Meter-dose inhaler medications, and, Nitroglycerin.
These medications are: Oxygen, Activated charcoal, Oral glucose, Aspirin, Epinephrine auto-injector, Meter-dose inhaler medications, and, Nitroglycerin.	What are the medications that may be administered by EMTs (depending of course on local protocol)?
What is Lipitor AKA atorvastatin used for?	This is used to lower cholesterol.
This is used to lower cholesterol.	What is Lipitor AKA atorvastatin used for?
What is montelukast AKA Singulair used for?	This is used to help prevent asthma attacks.
This is used to help prevent asthma attacks.	What is montelukast AKA Singulair used for?
What is escitalopram AKA Lexapro used for?	This is used to treat depression.
This is used to treat depression.	What is escitalopram AKA Lexapro used for?
What is esomeprazole AKA Nexium used for?	This is used to treat gastric reflux.
This is used to treat gastric reflux.	What is esomeprazole AKA Nexium used for?
What is levothyroxine AKA Synthroid used for?	This is used to treat decreased thyroid functioning.
This is used to treat decreased thyroid functioning.	What is levothyroxine AKA Synthroid used for?
What is clopidogrel AKA Plavix used for?	This is used to prevent stroke and heart attack.
This is used to prevent stroke and heart attack.	What is clopidogrel AKA Plavix used for?
What is metroprolol AKA Toprol used for?	This is used to lower blood pressure.
This is used to lower blood pressure.	What is metroprolol AKA Toprol used for?
What is lansoprazole AKA Prevacid used for?	This is used to treat stomach ulcers.
This is used to treat stomach ulcers.	What is lansoprazole AKA Prevacid used for?
What is ezetimibe and simvastatin AKA Vytorin AKA Zetia used for?	This is used to lower cholesterol.
This is used to lower cholesterol.	What is ezetimibe and simvastatin AKA Vytorin AKA Zetia used for?
What is fluticasone and salmeterol AKA Advair Diskus used for?	This is used to treat asthma.
This is used to treat asthma.	What is fluticasone and salmeterol AKA Advair Diskus used for?
What is cetirizine AKA Zyrtec used for?	This is used to treat allergies.
This is used to treat allergies.	What is cetirizine AKA Zyrtec used for?
What is venlafaxine AKA Effexor used for?	This is used to treat depression.
This is used to treat depression.	What is venlafaxine AKA Effexor used for?
What is pantoprazole AKA Protonix used for?	This is used to treat gastic reflux.
This is used to treat gastic reflux.	What is pantoprazole AKA Protonix used for?
What is valsartan AKA Diovan used for?	This is used to treat high blood pressure.
This is used to treat high blood pressure.	What is valsartan AKA Diovan used for?
What is alendronate AKA Fosamax used for?	This is used to treat osteoporosis.
This is used to treat osteoporosis.	What is alendronate AKA Fosamax used for?
What is potassium chloride AKA Klor-Con used for?	This is used to treat low potassium levels.
This is used to treat low potassium levels.	What is potassium chloride AKA Klor-Con used for?
What is valsartan and hydrochlorothiazide AKA Diovan HCT used for?	This is used to treat hypertension.
This is used to treat hypertension.	What is valsartan and hydrochlorothiazide AKA Diovan HCT used for?
What is levofloxacin AKA Levaquin?	This is an antibiotic.
This is an antibiotic.	What is levofloxacin AKA Levaquin?
What is polypharmacy?	This refers to the use of multiple medications by one person.
This refers to the use of multiple medications by one person.	What is polypharmacy?
What is a common bronchodilator?	A common kind of this medication is albuterol (AKA Proventil or Ventolin).
A common kind of this medication is albuterol (AKA Proventil or Ventolin).	What is a common bronchodilator?
What is another name for asthma?	This is also known as reactive airway disease.
This is also known as reactive airway disease.	What is another name for asthma?
What is the standard dose of epinephrine in an auto-injector?	The standard dose for this is 0.3 mg.
The standard dose for this is 0.3 mg.	What is the standard dose of epinephrine in an auto-injector?
What is epinephrine (AKA adrenaline), and what are its characteristics?	This is the main hormone that controls the body's fight-or-flight response and is the primary medication EMTs will administer IM. It is sympathomimetic, meaning it mimics the effect of the sympathetic nervous system. Characteristics of this chemical are: Secreted naturally by the adrenal glands. Dilates passages in the lungs. Constricts blood vessels, causing increased blood pressure. Increases heart rate and blood pressure.   Contraindication for this include: hypertension, hypothermia, myocardial infarction, and, no sign of wheezing or hypotension
This is the main hormone that controls the body's fight-or-flight response and is the primary medication EMTs will administer IM. It is sympathomimetic, meaning it mimics the effect of the sympathetic nervous system. Characteristics of this chemical are: Secreted naturally by the adrenal glands. Dilates passages in the lungs. Constricts blood vessels, causing increased blood pressure. Increases heart rate and blood pressure.   Contraindication for this include: hypertension, hypothermia, myocardial infarction, and, no sign of wheezing or hypotension	What is epinephrine (AKA adrenaline), and what are its characteristics?
What is nitroglycerin?	The purpose of this is to increase blood flow by relieving the spasms or causing the arteries to dilate. It does this by relaxing the muscular walls of the coronary arteries and veins. Always take the patient's blood pressure before administering this; if systolic blood pressure is less than 100 mm Hg, do not administer this medication. Contraindications for this include: sildenafil (Viagra), tadalafil (Cialis), vardenafil (Levitra), or any other medications that are used for the treatment of erectile dysfunction taken in the previous 24 hours.
The purpose of this is to increase blood flow by relieving the spasms or causing the arteries to dilate. It does this by relaxing the muscular walls of the coronary arteries and veins. Always take the patient's blood pressure before administering this; if systolic blood pressure is less than 100 mm Hg, do not administer this medication. Contraindications for this include: sildenafil (Viagra), tadalafil (Cialis), vardenafil (Levitra), or any other medications that are used for the treatment of erectile dysfunction taken in the previous 24 hours.	What is nitroglycerin?
What is the standard dose for nitroglycerin?	The standard dose for this is .4 mg / pill.
The standard dose for this is .4 mg / pill.	What is the standard dose for nitroglycerin?
How long should you wait between doses of nitroglycerin?	You should wait 5 minutes before administering another dose of this.
You should wait 5 minutes before administering another dose of this.	How long should you wait between doses of nitroglycerin?
What is aspirin (A.K.A. acetylsalicylic acid or A.S.A.)?	This is an antipyretic (fever reducer), analgesic (reduces pain), and anti-inflammatory medication that also inhibits platelet aggregation. Taken during a heart attack, this may prove lifesaving. It should not be given to children during episodes of fever-causing illness due to its association with Reye syndrome (which causes swelling in the brain and liver).
This is an antipyretic (fever reducer), analgesic (reduces pain), and anti-inflammatory medication that also inhibits platelet aggregation. Taken during a heart attack, this may prove lifesaving. It should not be given to children during episodes of fever-causing illness due to its association with Reye syndrome (which causes swelling in the brain and liver).	What is aspirin (A.K.A. acetylsalicylic acid or A.S.A.)?
What is adsorption?	This means to bind or stick to a surface.
This means to bind or stick to a surface.	What is adsorption?
What is the usual dose for activated charcoal?	This is usually 1 to 2 grams per kilogram of body weight.
This is usually 1 to 2 grams per kilogram of body weight.	What is the usual dose for activated charcoal?
As an EMT, what is the only way you can administer oral glucose?	As an EMT, you can only administer this orally.
As an EMT, you can only administer this orally.	As an EMT, what is the only way you can administer oral glucose?
What are the action, indications, contraindications, routes, sides effects, interactions, adult dose, and administration concerns of Acetaminophen / Tylenol?	For this medication: Action: Analgesic and antifever Indications: Relief of mild pain or fever, headache, and muscle aches Contraindications: Hypersensitivity Routes: PO Side Effects: Allergic reaction Interactions: Caution must be taken when EMTs are administering this to avoid potential overdosing. Adult dose: 500 to 1000 mg every 4 hours as needed; dose is weight based for children. Administration concerns: Weight of child is more important than age.
For this medication: Action: Analgesic and antifever Indications: Relief of mild pain or fever, headache, and muscle aches Contraindications: Hypersensitivity Routes: PO Side Effects: Allergic reaction Interactions: Caution must be taken when EMTs are administering this to avoid potential overdosing. Adult dose: 500 to 1000 mg every 4 hours as needed; dose is weight based for children. Administration concerns: Weight of child is more important than age.	What are the action, indications, contraindications, routes, sides effects, interactions, adult dose, and administration concerns of Acetaminophen / Tylenol?
What are the action, indications, contraindications, routes, sides effects, interactions, adult dose, and administration concerns of activated charcoal / actidose with Sorbitol?	For this medication: Action: Adsorbs toxic substances in the digestive tract. Indications: Most oral poisonings; overdose. Contraindications: Decreased level of consciousness; overdose of corrosives, caustics, or petroleum substances. Routes: PO. Side Effects: Nausea, vomiting, constipation, black stool. Interactions: Bonds with and inactivates most medications / substance in the digestive tract. Adult dose: 1 to 2 grams per kilogram Administration concerns: Stains; protect patient and provider clothing; do not give when giving other PO medications.
For this medication: Action: Adsorbs toxic substances in the digestive tract. Indications: Most oral poisonings; overdose. Contraindications: Decreased level of consciousness; overdose of corrosives, caustics, or petroleum substances. Routes: PO. Side Effects: Nausea, vomiting, constipation, black stool. Interactions: Bonds with and inactivates most medications / substance in the digestive tract. Adult dose: 1 to 2 grams per kilogram Administration concerns: Stains; protect patient and provider clothing; do not give when giving other PO medications.	What are the action, indications, contraindications, routes, sides effects, interactions, adult dose, and administration concerns of activated charcoal / actidose with Sorbitol?
What are the action, indications, contraindications, routes, sides effects, interactions, adult dose, and administration concerns of Aspirin / Bayer?	For this medication: Action: Anti-inflammatory agent and anti-fever agent; prevents platelets from clumping, thereby decreasing formation of new clots. Indications: Relief of mild pain, headache, muscle aches, chest pain when considering myocardial infarction. Contraindications: Hypersensitivity, recent bleeding. Routes: PO Side Effects: Nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, bleeding, allergic reactions. Interactions: Caution should be used in patients who are taking anticoagulants. Adult dose: 160 to 325 mg for chest pain. Administration concerns: Do not administer for pain cause by trauma or for fevers in children; patients with chest pain must be able to chew tablets.
For this medication: Action: Anti-inflammatory agent and anti-fever agent; prevents platelets from clumping, thereby decreasing formation of new clots. Indications: Relief of mild pain, headache, muscle aches, chest pain when considering myocardial infarction. Contraindications: Hypersensitivity, recent bleeding. Routes: PO Side Effects: Nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, bleeding, allergic reactions. Interactions: Caution should be used in patients who are taking anticoagulants. Adult dose: 160 to 325 mg for chest pain. Administration concerns: Do not administer for pain cause by trauma or for fevers in children; patients with chest pain must be able to chew tablets.	What are the action, indications, contraindications, routes, sides effects, interactions, adult dose, and administration concerns of Aspirin / Bayer?
What are the action, indications, contraindications, routes, sides effects, interactions, adult dose, and administration concerns of Albuterol / Proventil, Ventolin?	For this medication: Action: Stimulates nervous system, causing bronchodilation. Indications: Asthma / difficulty breathing with wheezing. Contraindications: Hypersensitivity, tachycardia, myocardial infarction. Routes: MDI / inhalation. Side Effects: Hypertension, tachycardia, anxiety, restlessness. Interactions: Increases effects of other nervous system stimulants. Adult dose: 1 to 2 inhalations; wait 5 minutes before repeating dose. Administration concerns: Patient must inhale all medication in 1 breath; coach patient to hold breath for 5 seconds after inhalation.
For this medication: Action: Stimulates nervous system, causing bronchodilation. Indications: Asthma / difficulty breathing with wheezing. Contraindications: Hypersensitivity, tachycardia, myocardial infarction. Routes: MDI / inhalation. Side Effects: Hypertension, tachycardia, anxiety, restlessness. Interactions: Increases effects of other nervous system stimulants. Adult dose: 1 to 2 inhalations; wait 5 minutes before repeating dose. Administration concerns: Patient must inhale all medication in 1 breath; coach patient to hold breath for 5 seconds after inhalation.	What are the action, indications, contraindications, routes, sides effects, interactions, adult dose, and administration concerns of Albuterol / Proventil, Ventolin?
What are the action, indications, contraindications, routes, sides effects, interactions, adult dose, and administration concerns of diphenhydramine / Benadryl?	For this medication: Action: Antihistamine. Indications: Mild allergic reactions. Contraindications: Asthma, glaucoma, pregnancy, hypertension, infants. Routes: PO Side Effects: Sleepiness, dry mouth, and throat. Interactions: Do not take with alcohol or MAO inhibitors (a type of psychiatric medication). Adult dose: 25 to 50 mg. Administration concerns: Can use in severe allergic reaction; however, epinephrine is administered first.
For this medication: Action: Antihistamine. Indications: Mild allergic reactions. Contraindications: Asthma, glaucoma, pregnancy, hypertension, infants. Routes: PO Side Effects: Sleepiness, dry mouth, and throat. Interactions: Do not take with alcohol or MAO inhibitors (a type of psychiatric medication). Adult dose: 25 to 50 mg. Administration concerns: Can use in severe allergic reaction; however, epinephrine is administered first.	What are the action, indications, contraindications, routes, sides effects, interactions, adult dose, and administration concerns of diphenhydramine / Benadryl?
What are the action, indications, contraindications, routes, sides effects, interactions, adult dose, and administration concerns of Epinephrine / EpiPen?	For this medication: Action: Stimulates nervous system, causing bronchodilation. Indications: Severe allergic reactions. Contraindications: Myocardial infarction, hypothermia, hypertension. Routes: IM (auto-injector). Side Effects: Hypertension, tachycardia, anxiety, restlessness. Interactions: Increases effects of other nervous system stimulants. Adult dose: 1 auto-injector. Administration concerns: Medication will last approximately 5 minutes; do not repeat dose; ensure ALS is en route for continuing treatment.
For this medication: Action: Stimulates nervous system, causing bronchodilation. Indications: Severe allergic reactions. Contraindications: Myocardial infarction, hypothermia, hypertension. Routes: IM (auto-injector). Side Effects: Hypertension, tachycardia, anxiety, restlessness. Interactions: Increases effects of other nervous system stimulants. Adult dose: 1 auto-injector. Administration concerns: Medication will last approximately 5 minutes; do not repeat dose; ensure ALS is en route for continuing treatment.	What are the action, indications, contraindications, routes, sides effects, interactions, adult dose, and administration concerns of Epinephrine / EpiPen?
What are the action, indications, contraindications, routes, sides effects, interactions, adult dose, and administration concerns of ibuprofen / Advil, Motrin, Nuprin?	For this medication: Action: Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug that reduces inflammation and fever, analgesic. Indications: Mild pain or fever, headache, muscle aches. Contraindications: Hypersensitivity. Routes: PO Side Effects: Nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, bleeding, allergic reactions. Interactions: Do not take with aspirin. Adult dose: 200 to 400 mg every 4 to 6 hours; dose is weight based in children. Administration concerns: Do not take for pain caused by trauma; weight of child is more important than age.
For this medication: Action: Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug that reduces inflammation and fever, analgesic. Indications: Mild pain or fever, headache, muscle aches. Contraindications: Hypersensitivity. Routes: PO Side Effects: Nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, bleeding, allergic reactions. Interactions: Do not take with aspirin. Adult dose: 200 to 400 mg every 4 to 6 hours; dose is weight based in children. Administration concerns: Do not take for pain caused by trauma; weight of child is more important than age.	What are the action, indications, contraindications, routes, sides effects, interactions, adult dose, and administration concerns of ibuprofen / Advil, Motrin, Nuprin?
What are the action, indications, contraindications, routes, sides effects, interactions, adult dose, and administration concerns of nitroglycerin / Nitrostat?	For this medication: Action: Dilates blood vessels. Indications: Chest pain due to myocardial infarction or angina. Contraindications: Hypotension, having taken sildenafil (Viagra) or another treatment for erectile dysfunction with the past 24 hours; head injury. Routes: SL / Spray. Side Effects: Headache, burning under tongue, hypotension, nausea. Interactions: Increases dilating effects of other blood vessel-dilating medications. Adult dose: 0.3 to 0.4 mg SL; 0.4 mg spray. Administration concerns: Ensure ALS is en route.
For this medication: Action: Dilates blood vessels. Indications: Chest pain due to myocardial infarction or angina. Contraindications: Hypotension, having taken sildenafil (Viagra) or another treatment for erectile dysfunction with the past 24 hours; head injury. Routes: SL / Spray. Side Effects: Headache, burning under tongue, hypotension, nausea. Interactions: Increases dilating effects of other blood vessel-dilating medications. Adult dose: 0.3 to 0.4 mg SL; 0.4 mg spray. Administration concerns: Ensure ALS is en route.	What are the action, indications, contraindications, routes, sides effects, interactions, adult dose, and administration concerns of nitroglycerin / Nitrostat?
What are the action, indications, contraindications, routes, sides effects, interactions, adult dose, and administration concerns of oral glucose / Glutose?	For this medication: Action: When absorbed, provides glucose for cell use. Indications: Hypoglycemia. Contraindications: Decreased level of consciousness, nausea, vomiting. Routes: PO Side Effects: Nausea, vomiting. Interactions: None. Adult dose: 1/2 to 1 tube. Administration concerns: Patient must have control of airway and be awake and able to follow commands.
For this medication: Action: When absorbed, provides glucose for cell use. Indications: Hypoglycemia. Contraindications: Decreased level of consciousness, nausea, vomiting. Routes: PO Side Effects: Nausea, vomiting. Interactions: None. Adult dose: 1/2 to 1 tube. Administration concerns: Patient must have control of airway and be awake and able to follow commands.	What are the action, indications, contraindications, routes, sides effects, interactions, adult dose, and administration concerns of oral glucose / Glutose?
What are the action, indications, contraindications, routes, sides effects, interactions, adult dose, and administration concerns of oxygen?	For this medication: Action: Reverses hypoxia, provides oxygen to be absorbed by lungs. Indications: Hypoxia or suspected hypoxia. Contraindications: Very rarely in patients with C.O.P.D. Routes: Gas / Inhalation. Side Effects: Decreased respiratory effort in rare cases in patients with C.O.P.D. Interactions: Can support combustion. Adult dose: Use oxygen delivery to administer 28% to 100% oxygen.  Administration concerns: No open flames nearby; do not withhold oxygen from patients in respiratory distress.
For this medication: Action: Reverses hypoxia, provides oxygen to be absorbed by lungs. Indications: Hypoxia or suspected hypoxia. Contraindications: Very rarely in patients with C.O.P.D. Routes: Gas / Inhalation. Side Effects: Decreased respiratory effort in rare cases in patients with C.O.P.D. Interactions: Can support combustion. Adult dose: Use oxygen delivery to administer 28% to 100% oxygen.  Administration concerns: No open flames nearby; do not withhold oxygen from patients in respiratory distress.	What are the action, indications, contraindications, routes, sides effects, interactions, adult dose, and administration concerns of oxygen?
What is a neonate?	This is a baby from birth to 1 month.
This is a baby from birth to 1 month.	What is a neonate?
What are the pulse rate, respirations, systolic blood pressure, and temperature of neonates (0 to 1 month)?	For this group: Pulse: 90 to 180; Respirations: 30 to 60; Systolic Blood Pressure: 50 to 70; and, Temperature: 98 to 100 Farenhait
For this group: Pulse: 90 to 180; Respirations: 30 to 60; Systolic Blood Pressure: 50 to 70; and, Temperature: 98 to 100 Farenhait	What are the pulse rate, respirations, systolic blood pressure, and temperature of neonates (0 to 1 month)?
What are the pulse rate, respirations, systolic blood pressure, and temperature of infants (1 month to 1 year)?	For this group: Pulse: 100 to 160; Respirations: 25 to 50; Systolic Blood Pressure: 70 to 95; and, Temperature: 96.8 to 99.6 Farenhait
For this group: Pulse: 100 to 160; Respirations: 25 to 50; Systolic Blood Pressure: 70 to 95; and, Temperature: 96.8 to 99.6 Farenhait	What are the pulse rate, respirations, systolic blood pressure, and temperature of infants (1 month to 1 year)?
What are the pulse rate, respirations, systolic blood pressure, and temperature of toddler (1 to 3 years)?	For this group: Pulse: 90 to 150; Respirations: 20 to 30; Systolic Blood Pressure: 80 to 100; and, Temperature: 96.8 to 99.6 Farenhait
For this group: Pulse: 90 to 150; Respirations: 20 to 30; Systolic Blood Pressure: 80 to 100; and, Temperature: 96.8 to 99.6 Farenhait	What are the pulse rate, respirations, systolic blood pressure, and temperature of toddler (1 to 3 years)?
What are the pulse rate, respirations, systolic blood pressure, and temperature of preschool age children (3 to 6 years)?	For this group: Pulse: 80 to 140; Respirations: 20 to 25; Systolic Blood Pressure: 80 to 100; and, Temperature: 98.6 Farenhait
For this group: Pulse: 80 to 140; Respirations: 20 to 25; Systolic Blood Pressure: 80 to 100; and, Temperature: 98.6 Farenhait	What are the pulse rate, respirations, systolic blood pressure, and temperature of preschool age children (3 to 6 years)?
What are the pulse rate, respirations, systolic blood pressure, and temperature of school age children (6 to 12 years)?	For this group: Pulse: 70 to 120; Respirations: 15 to 20; Systolic Blood Pressure: 80 to 110; and, Temperature: 98.6 Farenhait
For this group: Pulse: 70 to 120; Respirations: 15 to 20; Systolic Blood Pressure: 80 to 110; and, Temperature: 98.6 Farenhait	What are the pulse rate, respirations, systolic blood pressure, and temperature of school age children (6 to 12 years)?
What are the pulse rate, respirations, systolic blood pressure, and temperature of early adults (19 to 40 years) and middle adults (41 to 60 years)?	For these groups: Pulse: 60 to 100; Respirations: 12 to 20; Systolic Blood Pressure: 90 to 140; and, Temperature: 98.6 Farenhait
For these groups: Pulse: 60 to 100; Respirations: 12 to 20; Systolic Blood Pressure: 90 to 140; and, Temperature: 98.6 Farenhait	What are the pulse rate, respirations, systolic blood pressure, and temperature of early adults (19 to 40 years) and middle adults (41 to 60 years)?
What are the pulse rate, respirations, systolic blood pressure, and temperature of adolescents (12 to 18 years)?	For this group: Pulse: 60 to 100; Respirations: 12 to 20; Systolic Blood Pressure: 90 to 110; and, Temperature: 98.6 Farenhait
For this group: Pulse: 60 to 100; Respirations: 12 to 20; Systolic Blood Pressure: 90 to 110; and, Temperature: 98.6 Farenhait	What are the pulse rate, respirations, systolic blood pressure, and temperature of adolescents (12 to 18 years)?
What is the general rule for age and pulse rates / respirations?	The general rule is: the younger the person, the faster the pulse rate and respirations.
The general rule is: the younger the person, the faster the pulse rate and respirations.	What is the general rule for age and pulse rates / respirations?
What is the tidal volume in neonates?	In this age group, the tidal volume is 6 to 8 mL per kg.
In this age group, the tidal volume is 6 to 8 mL per kg.	What is the tidal volume in neonates?
How much does a neonate usually weigh at birth, what percent of their weight does their head account for, and how much weight do they gain as they develop?	This group usually weighs 6 to 8 lbs (3 to 3.5 kg) at birth, with the head accounting for 25% of its body weight. In the first week, 5% to 10% of their birth weight is lost due to fluid loss. I n the second week, they start growing at a rate of about 30g a day.
This group usually weighs 6 to 8 lbs (3 to 3.5 kg) at birth, with the head accounting for 25% of its body weight. In the first week, 5% to 10% of their birth weight is lost due to fluid loss. I n the second week, they start growing at a rate of about 30g a day.	How much does a neonate usually weigh at birth, what percent of their weight does their head account for, and how much weight do they gain as they develop?
What are some important considerations regarding a neonate's pulmonary system?	"In the group: 1) Their first breath is forceful, as they must inflate their lungs. 2) This group is particularly prone to nasal congestion, which causes upper respiratory infections. If you recieve a call for choking, make sure the nasal passages are clear and unobstructed by mucus. 3) Their rib cage is less rigid and the ribs sit horizontally. This explains their diaphragmatic breathing (AKA ""belly breathing"")."
"In the group: 1) Their first breath is forceful, as they must inflate their lungs. 2) This group is particularly prone to nasal congestion, which causes upper respiratory infections. If you recieve a call for choking, make sure the nasal passages are clear and unobstructed by mucus. 3) Their rib cage is less rigid and the ribs sit horizontally. This explains their diaphragmatic breathing (AKA ""belly breathing"")."	What are some important considerations regarding a neonate's pulmonary system?
What is barotrauma?	This is trauma resulting from pressure disequilibrium across body surfaces, for example from too much pressure in the lungs.
This is trauma resulting from pressure disequilibrium across body surfaces, for example from too much pressure in the lungs.	What is barotrauma?
What is the moro reflex?	This (AKA startle reflex) is when a neonate is caught off guard by something or someone; the neonate opens his or her arms wide, spreads the fingers, and seems to grab at things.
This (AKA startle reflex) is when a neonate is caught off guard by something or someone; the neonate opens his or her arms wide, spreads the fingers, and seems to grab at things.	What is the moro reflex?
What is the palmer grasp?	This is an infant reflex; when an is object is placed in their palm, they grasp at the object.
This is an infant reflex; when an is object is placed in their palm, they grasp at the object.	What is the palmer grasp?
What is the rooting reflex?	This takes place when something touches a neonate's cheek; the neonate will instinctively turn his or her head toward the touch.
This takes place when something touches a neonate's cheek; the neonate will instinctively turn his or her head toward the touch.	What is the rooting reflex?
What is the sucking reflex?	This occurs when a neonate's lips are stroked.
This occurs when a neonate's lips are stroked.	What is the sucking reflex?
What are fontanelles?	These are areas where the infat's skull has not fused together; the posterior fuses by the third month; the anterior between 9 and 18 months.
These are areas where the infat's skull has not fused together; the posterior fuses by the third month; the anterior between 9 and 18 months.	What are fontanelles?
If an infant's fontanelles' is depressed or bulging, what does that mean?	If these are depressed, the infant is most likely dehydrated. These bulging is indicative of increased intracranial pressure.
If these are depressed, the infant is most likely dehydrated. These bulging is indicative of increased intracranial pressure.	If an infant's fontanelles' is depressed or bulging, what does that mean?
What are the noticeable characteristics of an infant at 2 months?	At this age, the infant can recognize familar faces, and is able to track objects with their eyes.
At this age, the infant can recognize familar faces, and is able to track objects with their eyes.	What are the noticeable characteristics of an infant at 2 months?
What are the noticeable characteristics of an infant at 3 months?	At this age, the infant can bring objects to the mouth, and can smile and frown.
At this age, the infant can bring objects to the mouth, and can smile and frown.	What are the noticeable characteristics of an infant at 3 months?
What are the noticeable characteristics of an infant at 4 months?	At this age, the infant can reach out to people and drool.
At this age, the infant can reach out to people and drool.	What are the noticeable characteristics of an infant at 4 months?
What are the noticeable characteristics of an infant at 5 months?	At this age, the infant can sleep through the night, and can tell family from strangers.
At this age, the infant can sleep through the night, and can tell family from strangers.	What are the noticeable characteristics of an infant at 5 months?
What are the noticeable characteristics of an infant at 6 months?	At this age, teething begins; the infant can sit upright in a chair, and one-syllable words are spoken.
At this age, teething begins; the infant can sit upright in a chair, and one-syllable words are spoken.	What are the noticeable characteristics of an infant at 6 months?
What are the noticeable characteristics of an infant at 7 months?	At this age, the infant is afraid of strangers, and has mood swings.
At this age, the infant is afraid of strangers, and has mood swings.	What are the noticeable characteristics of an infant at 7 months?
What are the noticeable characteristics of an infant at 8 months?	"At this age, the infant responds to ""no"", can sit alone, and plays peek-a-boo."
"At this age, the infant responds to ""no"", can sit alone, and plays peek-a-boo."	What are the noticeable characteristics of an infant at 8 months?
What are the noticeable characteristics of an infant at 9 months?	At this age, the infant can pull himself or herself up, and places objects in mouth to explore them,
At this age, the infant can pull himself or herself up, and places objects in mouth to explore them,	What are the noticeable characteristics of an infant at 9 months?
What are the noticeable characteristics of an infant at 10 months?	At this age, the infant responds to his or her name, and crawls efficiently.
At this age, the infant responds to his or her name, and crawls efficiently.	What are the noticeable characteristics of an infant at 10 months?
What are the noticeable characteristics of an infant at 11 months?	At this age, the infant starts to walk without help, and can be frustrated with restrictions.
At this age, the infant starts to walk without help, and can be frustrated with restrictions.	What are the noticeable characteristics of an infant at 11 months?
What are the noticeable characteristics of an infant at 12 months?	At this age, the infant knows his or her name, and can walk.
At this age, the infant knows his or her name, and can walk.	What are the noticeable characteristics of an infant at 12 months?
What a secure attachment?	"This occurs when an infant understands that parents or caregivers will be responsive to his or her needs. This realization encourages a child to reach out and explore, knowing that the parents will provide a ""safety net""."
"This occurs when an infant understands that parents or caregivers will be responsive to his or her needs. This realization encourages a child to reach out and explore, knowing that the parents will provide a ""safety net""."	What a secure attachment?
What is anxious-avoidant attachment?	In this attachment style, children show little emotional response to their parents or caregivers and treat them as they would strangers. These children develop an isolated lifestyle where they do not have to depend on the support and care of others.
In this attachment style, children show little emotional response to their parents or caregivers and treat them as they would strangers. These children develop an isolated lifestyle where they do not have to depend on the support and care of others.	What is anxious-avoidant attachment?
What are some physical developments in toddlers and preschoolers?	In these age groups: 1) The children do not have well-developed lung musculature. This anomaly prevents them from sustaining deep or rapid respirations for an extended period of time. 2) They lose passive immunity and acquire their own immunity as the body is exposed to various viruses and germs. 3) The average age for completion of toilet training is 28 months of age.
In these age groups: 1) The children do not have well-developed lung musculature. This anomaly prevents them from sustaining deep or rapid respirations for an extended period of time. 2) They lose passive immunity and acquire their own immunity as the body is exposed to various viruses and germs. 3) The average age for completion of toilet training is 28 months of age.	What are some physical developments in toddlers and preschoolers?
At what age do children transition from using language to communicate what they want to using language creatively and playfully.	This transition occurs by the age of 3 or 4.
This transition occurs by the age of 3 or 4.	At what age do children transition from using language to communicate what they want to using language creatively and playfully.
How much do most school age children grow each year?	This group grows about 4 lbs (2 kg) and 2 1/2 inches (6 cm) each year.
This group grows about 4 lbs (2 kg) and 2 1/2 inches (6 cm) each year.	How much do most school age children grow each year?
What is pre-conventional reasoning?	In this stage of development, children act almost purely to avoid punishment and to get what they want.
In this stage of development, children act almost purely to avoid punishment and to get what they want.	What is pre-conventional reasoning?
What is conventional reasoning?	In this stage of development, children look for approval from their peers and society.
In this stage of development, children look for approval from their peers and society.	What is conventional reasoning?
What is postconventional reasoning?	In this stage of development, children make decisions guided by their conscience.
In this stage of development, children make decisions guided by their conscience.	What is postconventional reasoning?
What is atherosclerosis?	In this disorder, cholesterol and calcium build-up inside the walls of blood vessels, forming plaque. More than 60% of people older than 65 years ahve atherosclerotic disease.
In this disorder, cholesterol and calcium build-up inside the walls of blood vessels, forming plaque. More than 60% of people older than 65 years ahve atherosclerotic disease.	What is atherosclerosis?
What happens to the respiratory system of late adults?	In this group: 1) The size of the airway increases. 2) The surface of the alveoli decreases. and 3) Factors such as loss of respiratory muscle mass and an increased stiffness of the thoracic cage leads to up to a 50% decresse of vital capacity by age 75.
In this group: 1) The size of the airway increases. 2) The surface of the alveoli decreases. and 3) Factors such as loss of respiratory muscle mass and an increased stiffness of the thoracic cage leads to up to a 50% decresse of vital capacity by age 75.	What happens to the respiratory system of late adults?
What happens to the endocrine system of late adults?	In this group: As a person gains weight, more insulin is need to control the body's metabolism and blood glucose level. The pancreas may not be able to produce enough insulin for the person's body size, which can lead to diabetes mellitus.
In this group: As a person gains weight, more insulin is need to control the body's metabolism and blood glucose level. The pancreas may not be able to produce enough insulin for the person's body size, which can lead to diabetes mellitus.	What happens to the endocrine system of late adults?
What happens to the digestive system of late adults?	In this group: Blood flow may drop by as much as 50%, decreasing the ability of the intestines to extract vitamins and minerals from digested food.
In this group: Blood flow may drop by as much as 50%, decreasing the ability of the intestines to extract vitamins and minerals from digested food.	What happens to the digestive system of late adults?
What happens to the renal system of late adults?	In this group: 1) The filtration function of the kidneys declines by 50% from age 20 to age 90. 2) Kidney mass decreases by 20% over the same span. 3) The number of nephrons (capillaries that perform filtering in the kidney) also decreases, which leads to a decrease in the ability to clear wastes from the body.
In this group: 1) The filtration function of the kidneys declines by 50% from age 20 to age 90. 2) Kidney mass decreases by 20% over the same span. 3) The number of nephrons (capillaries that perform filtering in the kidney) also decreases, which leads to a decrease in the ability to clear wastes from the body.	What happens to the renal system of late adults?
What happens to the nervous system of late adults?	In this group: 1) The brain may shrink 10% to 20% by age 80, increasing the possibility of internal trauma. 2) The number of neurons (brain cells) declines over one's lifetime. 3) The peripheral nervous system also slows with age.
In this group: 1) The brain may shrink 10% to 20% by age 80, increasing the possibility of internal trauma. 2) The number of neurons (brain cells) declines over one's lifetime. 3) The peripheral nervous system also slows with age.	What happens to the nervous system of late adults?
What is the terminal drop hypothesis?	This is a theory that a person's mental function declines in the last five years of life.
This is a theory that a person's mental function declines in the last five years of life.	What is the terminal drop hypothesis?
What percentage of single women of 60 years of age or older live at or below the poverty line in the United States.	More than 50% of this group live at or below the poverty line in the United States.
More than 50% of this group live at or below the poverty line in the United States.	What percentage of single women of 60 years of age or older live at or below the poverty line in the United States.
What is topographic anatomy?	This is the landmarks of the surface of the body used to orient treatment.
This is the landmarks of the surface of the body used to orient treatment.	What is topographic anatomy?
What is the anatomic position?	This is a position of reference in which the patient stands facing you, arms at the side, with the palms of the hands forward. To be consistent, health care providers use the patient's left and right as reference point.
This is a position of reference in which the patient stands facing you, arms at the side, with the palms of the hands forward. To be consistent, health care providers use the patient's left and right as reference point.	What is the anatomic position?
What are the three planes of the body?	These are: 1) Frontol (coronal) plane - Anterior vs. posterior. 2) Transverse (horizontal) plane - Superior vs. inferior. and 3) Sagittal plane - medial vs. lateral.
These are: 1) Frontol (coronal) plane - Anterior vs. posterior. 2) Transverse (horizontal) plane - Superior vs. inferior. and 3) Sagittal plane - medial vs. lateral.	What are the three planes of the body?
What is the opposite of superficial (closest to the surface of the skin)?	The opposite of this is deep (farthest from the surface of the skin).
The opposite of this is deep (farthest from the surface of the skin).	What is the opposite of superficial (closest to the surface of the skin)?
What is the palmar surface?	This is another term for the palm.
This is another term for the palm.	What is the palmar surface?
What is the plantar surface?	This is another term for the bottom of the foot.
This is another term for the bottom of the foot.	What is the plantar surface?
What is the apex (plural apices)?	This is the tip of a structure.
This is the tip of a structure.	What is the apex (plural apices)?
What is flexion?	This is the bending of a joint.
This is the bending of a joint.	What is flexion?
What is extension?	This is the straightening of a joint.
This is the straightening of a joint.	What is extension?
What is adduction?	This is motion toward the midline.
This is motion toward the midline.	What is adduction?
What is abduction?	This is motion away from the midline.
This is motion away from the midline.	What is abduction?
What does it mean if something is said to occur unilaterally?	This means something appears on only one side of the body.
This means something appears on only one side of the body.	What does it mean if something is said to occur unilaterally?
What are ligaments?	These connect bones to other bones.
These connect bones to other bones.	What are ligaments?
What are tendons?	These connect muscles to bones.
These connect muscles to bones.	What are tendons?
What is cartilage?	This is the soft, semiflexible material that is found within the joints and serves as cushioning.
This is the soft, semiflexible material that is found within the joints and serves as cushioning.	What is cartilage?
What is the axial skeleton?	This forms the foundation on which the arms and legs are hung. It is composed of the skull, face, thoracic cavity, and vertebral column.
This forms the foundation on which the arms and legs are hung. It is composed of the skull, face, thoracic cavity, and vertebral column.	What is the axial skeleton?
What is the appendicular skeleton?	This is composed of the arms and legs, their connective points, and the pelvis.
This is composed of the arms and legs, their connective points, and the pelvis.	What is the appendicular skeleton?
How many bones are there in the body?	There are 206 of these.
There are 206 of these.	How many bones are there in the body?
What is the foramen magnum?	This is a large opening at the base of the skull.
This is a large opening at the base of the skull.	What is the foramen magnum?
What are the maxillae?	These are the upper, non-moveable jawbones.
These are the upper, non-moveable jawbones.	What are the maxillae?
What are the zygomas?	These are the cheekbones.
These are the cheekbones.	What are the zygomas?
What is the orbit?	This is the eye socket.
This is the eye socket.	What is the orbit?
How many vertebrae are there in the body?	There are 33 of these in the body.
There are 33 of these in the body.	How many vertebrae are there in the body?
What are the five sections of the spine, and how many vertebrae in each?	These are the: 1) Cervical - 7 2) Thoracic - 12 3) Lumbar - 5 4) Sacrum - 5 5) Coccyx - 4
These are the: 1) Cervical - 7 2) Thoracic - 12 3) Lumbar - 5 4) Sacrum - 5 5) Coccyx - 4	What are the five sections of the spine, and how many vertebrae in each?
How many pairs of ribs are there in the body?	There are 12 pairs of these.
There are 12 pairs of these.	How many pairs of ribs are there in the body?
What is the sternum?	This is the midline of the chest. It's bordered superiorly by the easily palpable jugular notch. It has three components: the manubrium, the body, and the xiphoid process.
This is the midline of the chest. It's bordered superiorly by the easily palpable jugular notch. It has three components: the manubrium, the body, and the xiphoid process.	What is the sternum?
What is the xiphoid process.	This is a narrow, cartilaginous tip which forms the inferior part of the sternum.
This is a narrow, cartilaginous tip which forms the inferior part of the sternum.	What is the xiphoid process.
What is the shoulder girdle?	This is where three bones (the clavicle, scapula, and humerus) come together, allowing the arm to be moved.
This is where three bones (the clavicle, scapula, and humerus) come together, allowing the arm to be moved.	What is the shoulder girdle?
What is the clavicle (AKA the collarbone)?	This overlies the superior boundaries of the thorax in fonrt and articulates posteriorly with the scapula.
This overlies the superior boundaries of the thorax in fonrt and articulates posteriorly with the scapula.	What is the clavicle (AKA the collarbone)?
What is the scapula?	This lies in the muscular tissue of the posterior thoracic wall.
This lies in the muscular tissue of the posterior thoracic wall.	What is the scapula?
What two bones compose the forearm?	This is composed of the ulna (medial, larger in the proximal) and radius (lateral, larger in the distal).
This is composed of the ulna (medial, larger in the proximal) and radius (lateral, larger in the distal).	What two bones compose the forearm?
What bones make up the pelvis?	This is made up of the sacrum and the two pelvic bones, each of which is formed by the fusion of three separate bones, the ilium, the ischium, and the pubis, joined posteriorly by the sacrum.
This is made up of the sacrum and the two pelvic bones, each of which is formed by the fusion of three separate bones, the ilium, the ischium, and the pubis, joined posteriorly by the sacrum.	What bones make up the pelvis?
What is the pubis symphysis?	This is a hard and bony cartilaginous prominence found at the midline in the lowest portion of the abdomen, where the two halves of the pelvic rings are joined by cartilage at a joint with minimal motion.
This is a hard and bony cartilaginous prominence found at the midline in the lowest portion of the abdomen, where the two halves of the pelvic rings are joined by cartilage at a joint with minimal motion.	What is the pubis symphysis?
What is the acetabulum?	"This is the part of the pelvis where the lower leg connects, the ""socket"" in which the ""ball"" of the femur fits."
"This is the part of the pelvis where the lower leg connects, the ""socket"" in which the ""ball"" of the femur fits."	What is the acetabulum?
What is the greater trochanter?	This is the projection on the lateral / superior portion of the femur.
This is the projection on the lateral / superior portion of the femur.	What is the greater trochanter?
What is the lesser trochanter?	This is the medial / superior portion of the femur.
This is the medial / superior portion of the femur.	What is the lesser trochanter?
What is the patella?	This is the kneecap.
This is the kneecap.	What is the patella?
What is the tibia (shine bone)?	This is the larger bone of lower leg. It lies in the anterior of the leg.
This is the larger bone of lower leg. It lies in the anterior of the leg.	What is the tibia (shine bone)?
What is the fibula?	This is the smaller of the bones in the lower leg. It lies on the lateral side of the leg.
This is the smaller of the bones in the lower leg. It lies on the lateral side of the leg.	What is the fibula?
What is joint capsules?	These are fibrous sacs composed of ligaments at the end of bones, and assist in flexion.
These are fibrous sacs composed of ligaments at the end of bones, and assist in flexion.	What is joint capsules?
What is the synovial membrane?	This is special tissue on the inner lining of the joint capsule that is responsible for making a thick lubricant called synovial fluid. This fluid allows the ends of bones to glide over each other as opposed to grating.
This is special tissue on the inner lining of the joint capsule that is responsible for making a thick lubricant called synovial fluid. This fluid allows the ends of bones to glide over each other as opposed to grating.	What is the synovial membrane?
What is the difference between ball-and-socket joints and hinge joints?	The first allows rotation and bending (as in the shoulder joint), while the second restricts motion to one plane (as in the knee).
The first allows rotation and bending (as in the shoulder joint), while the second restricts motion to one plane (as in the knee).	What is the difference between ball-and-socket joints and hinge joints?
What is the skeletal system responsible for?	This is resonsible for: 1) giving the body shape. 2) providing protection of fragile organs. 3) allowing for movement. And, 4) helping with the creation of various types of blood cells.
This is resonsible for: 1) giving the body shape. 2) providing protection of fragile organs. 3) allowing for movement. And, 4) helping with the creation of various types of blood cells.	What is the skeletal system responsible for?
How many different muscles are there in the musculoskeletal system?	There are over 600 of these.
There are over 600 of these.	How many different muscles are there in the musculoskeletal system?
What are skeletal muscles (AKA voluntary muscles)?	These attach to the bones of the skeleton and forms the major muscle mass of the body. They are under direct voluntary control of the brain and can be stimulated to contract or relax at will.
These attach to the bones of the skeleton and forms the major muscle mass of the body. They are under direct voluntary control of the brain and can be stimulated to contract or relax at will.	What are skeletal muscles (AKA voluntary muscles)?
What is smooth muscle?	This is found within blood vessels and intestines.
This is found within blood vessels and intestines.	What is smooth muscle?
What is cardiac muscle?	This is found only within the heart.
This is found only within the heart.	What is cardiac muscle?
What is the epiglottis?	These is a thin, leaf-shaped valve that protects the opening of the trachea.
These is a thin, leaf-shaped valve that protects the opening of the trachea.	What is the epiglottis?
What is the location and function of the biceps?	This is located anterior to the humerus, and, flexes the lower arm.
This is located anterior to the humerus, and, flexes the lower arm.	What is the location and function of the biceps?
What is the location and function of the triceps?	This is located posterior to the humerus, and, extends the lower arm.
This is located posterior to the humerus, and, extends the lower arm.	What is the location and function of the triceps?
What is the location and function of the pectoralis?	This is located anterior to the thorax, and, flexes and rotates the arm.
This is located anterior to the thorax, and, flexes and rotates the arm.	What is the location and function of the pectoralis?
What is the location and function of the latissimus dorsi?	This is located posterior to the thorax, and, extends and rotates the arm.
This is located posterior to the thorax, and, extends and rotates the arm.	What is the location and function of the latissimus dorsi?
What is the location and function of the rectus abdominis?	This is located anterior to the abdomen, and, flexes and rotates the spine.
This is located anterior to the abdomen, and, flexes and rotates the spine.	What is the location and function of the rectus abdominis?
What is the location and function of the tibialis anterior?	This is located anterior to the tibia, and, points toes towards the heads.
This is located anterior to the tibia, and, points toes towards the heads.	What is the location and function of the tibialis anterior?
What is the location and function of the gastrocnemius?	This is located posterior to the tibia, and, points toes away from the head.
This is located posterior to the tibia, and, points toes away from the head.	What is the location and function of the gastrocnemius?
What is the location and function of the quadriceps?	This is located anterior to the femur, and, extends the lower leg.
This is located anterior to the femur, and, extends the lower leg.	What is the location and function of the quadriceps?
What is the location and function of the biceps femoris?	This is located posterior to the femur, and, flexes the lower leg.
This is located posterior to the femur, and, flexes the lower leg.	What is the location and function of the biceps femoris?
What is the location and function of the gluteus?	This is located posterior to the pelvis, and, extends and rotates the leg.
This is located posterior to the pelvis, and, extends and rotates the leg.	What is the location and function of the gluteus?
What is another name for the larynx?	Another name for this is the voice box.
Another name for this is the voice box.	What is another name for the larynx?
What is the cricothyroid membrane?	This lies between the thyroid and cricoid cartilage. It can be felt as a depression in the midline of the neck just inferior to the thyroid cartilage.
This lies between the thyroid and cricoid cartilage. It can be felt as a depression in the midline of the neck just inferior to the thyroid cartilage.	What is the cricothyroid membrane?
What kind of muscle is the diaphragm?	This is unique because it has characteristics of skeletal and smooth muscle.
This is unique because it has characteristics of skeletal and smooth muscle.	What kind of muscle is the diaphragm?
How does the body detect decreased blood pressure, and what will it do as a result?	The body detects this situation by the baroreceptors, and will initiate the release of epinephrine and norepinephrine.
The body detects this situation by the baroreceptors, and will initiate the release of epinephrine and norepinephrine.	How does the body detect decreased blood pressure, and what will it do as a result?
What is the V/Q ratio?	This examines how much gas is being moved effectively and how much blood is gaining access to the alveoli.
This examines how much gas is being moved effectively and how much blood is gaining access to the alveoli.	What is the V/Q ratio?
What is pathophysiology?	This is the study of the functional changes that occur when the body reacts to a particular disease.
This is the study of the functional changes that occur when the body reacts to a particular disease.	What is pathophysiology?
What is normal physiologic pH?	This is normally between 7.35 and 7.45 pH.
This is normally between 7.35 and 7.45 pH.	What is normal physiologic pH?
What is sodium bicarbonate?	This is an alkaline and helps to buffer or neutralize the acidic waste products of the cells.
This is an alkaline and helps to buffer or neutralize the acidic waste products of the cells.	What is sodium bicarbonate?
What is lactic acid?	This is the metabolic end product of the breakdown of glucose that accumulates when metabolism proceeds in the absence of oxygen (AKA anaerobic respiration).
This is the metabolic end product of the breakdown of glucose that accumulates when metabolism proceeds in the absence of oxygen (AKA anaerobic respiration).	What is lactic acid?
What is the endocrine system?	This is a complex message and control system that uses hormones to stimulate the body.
This is a complex message and control system that uses hormones to stimulate the body.	What is the endocrine system?
In a healthy adult, what percent of total body weight is delivered as fluid daily to the gastrointestinal tract?	About 7% of this is delivered. If significant vomiting or diarrhea occurs for more than 2 or 3 days, the person will lose a substantial portion of body composition and become severely ill.
About 7% of this is delivered. If significant vomiting or diarrhea occurs for more than 2 or 3 days, the person will lose a substantial portion of body composition and become severely ill.	In a healthy adult, what percent of total body weight is delivered as fluid daily to the gastrointestinal tract?
What are enzymes?	These are substance catalysts designed to speed up the rate of specific biochemical reactions.
These are substance catalysts designed to speed up the rate of specific biochemical reactions.	What are enzymes?
What are hormones?	These are substances formed in specialized organs or glands and carried to another organ or group of cells in the same organism. They regulate many body functions, including metabolism, growth, and body temperature.
These are substances formed in specialized organs or glands and carried to another organ or group of cells in the same organism. They regulate many body functions, including metabolism, growth, and body temperature.	What are hormones?
What is bile?	This is produced in the liver and stored in the gallbladder, and emptied as needed into the duodenum. Its major function is the digestion of fat.
This is produced in the liver and stored in the gallbladder, and emptied as needed into the duodenum. Its major function is the digestion of fat.	What is bile?
What is chyme?	This is ingested food converted in the stomach into a thoroughly mixed semisolid mass.
This is ingested food converted in the stomach into a thoroughly mixed semisolid mass.	What is chyme?
How much saliva is produced daily?	Approximately 1.5 litres of this is produced daily.
Approximately 1.5 litres of this is produced daily.	How much saliva is produced daily?
What is the average stroke volume (SV) of an adult heart?	This is 70 to 80 mL each on average.
This is 70 to 80 mL each on average.	What is the average stroke volume (SV) of an adult heart?
What is the average cardiac output (CO) of an adult?	This is 5 to 6 litres.
This is 5 to 6 litres.	What is the average cardiac output (CO) of an adult?
What are the two electrical processes associated with the mechanical contraction of the heart?	These are: 1) depolarization, when the electrical charge on the muscle cell surface changes from positive to negative. And, 2) repolarization, when the heart returns to its resting state and positive charge is restored to the surface.
These are: 1) depolarization, when the electrical charge on the muscle cell surface changes from positive to negative. And, 2) repolarization, when the heart returns to its resting state and positive charge is restored to the surface.	What are the two electrical processes associated with the mechanical contraction of the heart?
What is the path of the electrical impulse that produces the a smooth flow of electricity through the heart?	This begins high in the atria at the sinoatrial node, then travels to the atrioventricular node bundle of His, and moves through the Purkinje fivers to the ventricles.
This begins high in the atria at the sinoatrial node, then travels to the atrioventricular node bundle of His, and moves through the Purkinje fivers to the ventricles.	What is the path of the electrical impulse that produces the a smooth flow of electricity through the heart?
What is the chordae tendineae?	These are thin bands of fibrous tissue that attach to the valves in the heart and prevent them from inverting.
These are thin bands of fibrous tissue that attach to the valves in the heart and prevent them from inverting.	What is the chordae tendineae?
What is the tunica media?	This is the middle layer of the artery, and is where the smooth muscles are found that can contract and dilate to change the diameter of the blood vessels.
This is the middle layer of the artery, and is where the smooth muscles are found that can contract and dilate to change the diameter of the blood vessels.	What is the tunica media?
What are the coronary arteries?	These supply the heart.
These supply the heart.	What are the coronary arteries?
What are the carotid arteries?	These supply the head.
These supply the head.	What are the carotid arteries?
What are the hepatic arteries?	These supply the liver with blood.
These supply the liver with blood.	What are the hepatic arteries?
What are the renal arteries?	These supply the kidneys with blood.
These supply the kidneys with blood.	What are the renal arteries?
What are the mesenteric arteries?	These supply the digestive system with blood.
These supply the digestive system with blood.	What are the mesenteric arteries?
What is systemic vascular resistance (SVR)?	This is the resistance to blood flow within all of the blood vessels except the pulmonary vessels.
This is the resistance to blood flow within all of the blood vessels except the pulmonary vessels.	What is systemic vascular resistance (SVR)?
How much blood is in the spleen at any one time?	Approximately 450 mL of blood is in this organ at any one time. Virtually all the blood in the body passes through here during the day, where it is filtered.
Approximately 450 mL of blood is in this organ at any one time. Virtually all the blood in the body passes through here during the day, where it is filtered.	How much blood is in the spleen at any one time?
What is blood plasma composed of?	This is composed of: 92% water, 7% proteins such as albumin which regulates oncotic pressure, and the final 1% is oxygen, carbon dioxide, nitrogen, nutrients, cellular wastes, and other cellular products.
This is composed of: 92% water, 7% proteins such as albumin which regulates oncotic pressure, and the final 1% is oxygen, carbon dioxide, nitrogen, nutrients, cellular wastes, and other cellular products.	What is blood plasma composed of?
How much blood does a child have in their body?	This group has approximately 2 to 3 litres, depending on their age and size.
This group has approximately 2 to 3 litres, depending on their age and size.	How much blood does a child have in their body?
How much blood does an infant have in their body?	This group has only about 300 mL in their body.
This group has only about 300 mL in their body.	How much blood does an infant have in their body?
How much blood is in the heart, arteries, and capillaries versus the veins and venules?	The ratio is approximately 30% in the former group, and 70% in the later group.
The ratio is approximately 30% in the former group, and 70% in the later group.	How much blood is in the heart, arteries, and capillaries versus the veins and venules?
What is interstitial space?	This is the space between cells.
This is the space between cells.	What is interstitial space?
What are alpha-adrenergic receptors?	These are portions of the nervous system that when stimulated can cause constriction of blood vessels.
These are portions of the nervous system that when stimulated can cause constriction of blood vessels.	What are alpha-adrenergic receptors?
What are beta-adrenergic receptors?	These are portions of the nervous system that when stimulated can cause an increase in the force of the contraction of the heart, an increased heart rate, and bronchial dilation.
These are portions of the nervous system that when stimulated can cause an increase in the force of the contraction of the heart, an increased heart rate, and bronchial dilation.	What are beta-adrenergic receptors?
What are the three parts of the brain stem?	These are: 1) the midbrain, 2) the pons, and 3) the medulla oblongata.
These are: 1) the midbrain, 2) the pons, and 3) the medulla oblongata.	What are the three parts of the brain stem?
What is the parasympathetic nervous system?	This is the other half of the autonomic nervous system and generally slow down the body.
This is the other half of the autonomic nervous system and generally slow down the body.	What is the parasympathetic nervous system?
What are the 2 layers of the skin?	These are: 1) The epidermis; at its base is the germinal layer, which continuously produces new cells. 2) The dermis; the sweat glands, sebaceous (oil) glands, hair follices, blood vessels, and specialized nerve endings are located here.
These are: 1) The epidermis; at its base is the germinal layer, which continuously produces new cells. 2) The dermis; the sweat glands, sebaceous (oil) glands, hair follices, blood vessels, and specialized nerve endings are located here.	What are the 2 layers of the skin?
How long does it take for cells produced in the germinal layer to rise to the stratum corneal layer?	This journey takes about 4 weeks.
This journey takes about 4 weeks.	How long does it take for cells produced in the germinal layer to rise to the stratum corneal layer?
What is the location, function, and timing of the dorsal respiratory group (DRG)?	For this: Location: Medulla. Function: Causes inspiration when stimulated. Timing: Normal, resting respirations; rhythmic, mechanical pattern.
For this: Location: Medulla. Function: Causes inspiration when stimulated. Timing: Normal, resting respirations; rhythmic, mechanical pattern.	What is the location, function, and timing of the dorsal respiratory group (DRG)?
What is the location, function, and timing of the ventral respiratory group (VRG)?	For this: Location: Medulla. Function: Causes expiration or inspiration. Timing: Speech, increased emotional or physical stress.
For this: Location: Medulla. Function: Causes expiration or inspiration. Timing: Speech, increased emotional or physical stress.	What is the location, function, and timing of the ventral respiratory group (VRG)?
What is the location, function, and timing of the Pneumotaxic (pontine) center?	For this: Location: Pons. Function: Inhibits the DRG; increases speed and depth of respirations. Timing: Increased emotional or physical stress.
For this: Location: Pons. Function: Inhibits the DRG; increases speed and depth of respirations. Timing: Increased emotional or physical stress.	What is the location, function, and timing of the Pneumotaxic (pontine) center?
What is the location, function, and timing of the apneustic center?	For this: Location: Pons. Function: Excites the DRG; prolongs inspiration, decreases rate. Timing: Increased emotional or physical stress.
For this: Location: Pons. Function: Excites the DRG; prolongs inspiration, decreases rate. Timing: Increased emotional or physical stress.	What is the location, function, and timing of the apneustic center?
What is the location, function, and timing of the Hering-Breuer inflation reflex (stretch reflex)?	For this: Location: Chest. Function: Detects lung expansion to a point and then tells VGR and pneumotaxic and apneustic centers to stop. Timing: Increased emotional or physical stress.
For this: Location: Chest. Function: Detects lung expansion to a point and then tells VGR and pneumotaxic and apneustic centers to stop. Timing: Increased emotional or physical stress.	What is the location, function, and timing of the Hering-Breuer inflation reflex (stretch reflex)?
What is the location, function, and timing of the Hering-Breuer deflation reflex?	For this: Location: Chest. Function: Detects potential lung collapse and then tells VGR and pneumotaxic and apneustic centers to stop. Timing: Increased emotional or physical stress.
For this: Location: Chest. Function: Detects potential lung collapse and then tells VGR and pneumotaxic and apneustic centers to stop. Timing: Increased emotional or physical stress.	What is the location, function, and timing of the Hering-Breuer deflation reflex?
What is the location, function, and hormone produced in the adrenal gland?	For this gland: Location: Above the kidneys. Function: Stress response, fight or flight. Hormones produced: Epinephrine, norepinephrine, and others.
For this gland: Location: Above the kidneys. Function: Stress response, fight or flight. Hormones produced: Epinephrine, norepinephrine, and others.	What is the location, function, and hormone produced in the adrenal gland?
What is the location, function, and hormone produced in the ovary?	For this gland: Location: Female pelvis. Function: Regulates sexual function, characteristics, and reproduction. Hormones produced: Estrogen and others.
For this gland: Location: Female pelvis. Function: Regulates sexual function, characteristics, and reproduction. Hormones produced: Estrogen and others.	What is the location, function, and hormone produced in the ovary?
What is the location, function, and hormone produced in the pancreas?	For this gland: Location: Retroperitoneal space. Function: Regulates glucose metabolism and other functions. Hormones produced: Insulin and others.
For this gland: Location: Retroperitoneal space. Function: Regulates glucose metabolism and other functions. Hormones produced: Insulin and others.	What is the location, function, and hormone produced in the pancreas?
What is the location, function, and hormone produced in the parathyroid?	For this gland: Location: Neck (behind and beside the thyroid) (three to five glands) Function: Regulates serum calcium. Hormones produced: Parathyroid hormone.
For this gland: Location: Neck (behind and beside the thyroid) (three to five glands) Function: Regulates serum calcium. Hormones produced: Parathyroid hormone.	What is the location, function, and hormone produced in the parathyroid?
What is the location, function, and hormone produced in the pituitary gland?	For this gland: Location: Base of skull. Function: Regulates all other endocrine glands. Hormones produced: Multiple, controls other endocrine glands.
For this gland: Location: Base of skull. Function: Regulates all other endocrine glands. Hormones produced: Multiple, controls other endocrine glands.	What is the location, function, and hormone produced in the pituitary gland?
What is the location, function, and hormone produced in the testes?	For this gland: Location: Male scrotum. Function: Regulate sexual function, characteristics, and reproduction. Hormones produced: Testosterone and others.
For this gland: Location: Male scrotum. Function: Regulate sexual function, characteristics, and reproduction. Hormones produced: Testosterone and others.	What is the location, function, and hormone produced in the testes?
What is the location, function, and hormone produced in the thyroid?	For this gland: Location: Neck (over the larynx). Function: Regulates metabolism. Hormones produced: Thyroxine and others.
For this gland: Location: Neck (over the larynx). Function: Regulates metabolism. Hormones produced: Thyroxine and others.	What is the location, function, and hormone produced in the thyroid?
What is one example of an additional skill that an AEMT can perform that a standard EMT-B cannot?	One example of this is esophageal-tracheal intubation.
One example of this is esophageal-tracheal intubation.	What is one example of an additional skill that an AEMT can perform that a standard EMT-B cannot?
What are the responsibilities of the medical director?	This person uses their license to allow EMT-Bs to provide prehospital care, and is responsible for the quality of treatment given. They are also responsible for ensuring appropriate EMT education and continuing training, ensuring the appropriate standards are met by EMT-Bs, and serving as liaison with the medical community.
This person uses their license to allow EMT-Bs to provide prehospital care, and is responsible for the quality of treatment given. They are also responsible for ensuring appropriate EMT education and continuing training, ensuring the appropriate standards are met by EMT-Bs, and serving as liaison with the medical community.	What are the responsibilities of the medical director?
What are standing orders?	"These are specific policies issued by a medical director that authorizes an EMT to perform particular skills in certain situations (for example: ""if a patient has a blood sugar below 60, administer oral glucose"")."
"These are specific policies issued by a medical director that authorizes an EMT to perform particular skills in certain situations (for example: ""if a patient has a blood sugar below 60, administer oral glucose"")."	What are standing orders?
What does continuous quality improvement (AKA CQI) involve?	This involves: Remedial training as deemed necessary by the medical director. Discussion of needs for improvement. And, Periodic reviews of run reports.
This involves: Remedial training as deemed necessary by the medical director. Discussion of needs for improvement. And, Periodic reviews of run reports.	What does continuous quality improvement (AKA CQI) involve?
Who is responsible for maintaining quality control?	This responsibility ultimately rests with the medical director.
This responsibility ultimately rests with the medical director.	Who is responsible for maintaining quality control?
What is always an EMT-Bs first priority during a call?	This is always personal safety.
This is always personal safety.	What is always an EMT-Bs first priority during a call?
What are some essential skills an EMT-B needs to learn?	Some examples of this include: Verbal and written communication skills. Dealing with medical, legal, and ethical situations, and, Delivering a baby.
Some examples of this include: Verbal and written communication skills. Dealing with medical, legal, and ethical situations, and, Delivering a baby.	What are some essential skills an EMT-B needs to learn?
"What are the ten standards identified by the ""Technical Assistance Program Assessment Standards"" provided by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration?"	These are: 1) regulation and policy, 2) resource management, 3) human resources and training, 4) transportation, 5) facilities, 6) communications, 7) public information and education, 8) medical direction, 9) trauma systems, and 10) evaluation.
These are: 1) regulation and policy, 2) resource management, 3) human resources and training, 4) transportation, 5) facilities, 6) communications, 7) public information and education, 8) medical direction, 9) trauma systems, and 10) evaluation.	"What are the ten standards identified by the ""Technical Assistance Program Assessment Standards"" provided by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration?"
What is online medical control?	This is when you are in direct contact with a doctor concerning the current patient.
This is when you are in direct contact with a doctor concerning the current patient.	What is online medical control?
What is another term for medical direction?	Another term for this is medical control.
Another term for this is medical control.	What is another term for medical direction?
What is the list of steps taken in different situations, and developed by a medical director, called?	These are referred to as protocols.
These are referred to as protocols.	What is the list of steps taken in different situations, and developed by a medical director, called?
What federal agency has developed standards for training and development of the EMS system?	This agency is the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.
This agency is the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.	What federal agency has developed standards for training and development of the EMS system?
What are some components of the EMS system?	Some components of this include: 911 Dispatchers, Patients, EMS personnel, and First Responders.
Some components of this include: 911 Dispatchers, Patients, EMS personnel, and First Responders.	What are some components of the EMS system?
What is burnout?	This is a condition of chronic fatigue and frustration that results from mounting stress over time.
This is a condition of chronic fatigue and frustration that results from mounting stress over time.	What is burnout?
Who should handle downed power lines at the scene of a motor vehicle accident?	Only a power company employee is equiped to deal with this hazard.
Only a power company employee is equiped to deal with this hazard.	Who should handle downed power lines at the scene of a motor vehicle accident?
What should you remember when handling needles?	"When dealing with these, remember to: Always wear gloves. Never recap. Dispose in a ""sharps"" container. Consider any needle to be infectious."
"When dealing with these, remember to: Always wear gloves. Never recap. Dispose in a ""sharps"" container. Consider any needle to be infectious."	What should you remember when handling needles?
How is syphilis transmitted?	This is both a sexually transmitted disease and a bloodborne disease.
This is both a sexually transmitted disease and a bloodborne disease.	How is syphilis transmitted?
What are the stages of the grieving process?	The steps are: Denial, Hostility, Bargaining, Depression, and, Acceptance.
The steps are: Denial, Hostility, Bargaining, Depression, and, Acceptance.	What are the stages of the grieving process?
What is exposure?	This occurs when an individual comes in contact with blood or other bodily fluids. It is important to remember that this does not always lead to transmission and infection.
This occurs when an individual comes in contact with blood or other bodily fluids. It is important to remember that this does not always lead to transmission and infection.	What is exposure?
What are the five common hazards associated with fire?	These are: 1) Smoke. 2) Oxygen deficiency. 3) High ambient temperatures. 4) Toxic gases. and 5) Building collapse.
These are: 1) Smoke. 2) Oxygen deficiency. 3) High ambient temperatures. 4) Toxic gases. and 5) Building collapse.	What are the five common hazards associated with fire?
What occurs at a CISD (Critical Incident Stress Debriefing) meeting?	Here, mental health professionals will help you by listening to your feelings, fears, and reactions, then offering suggestions on how to overcome the stress.
Here, mental health professionals will help you by listening to your feelings, fears, and reactions, then offering suggestions on how to overcome the stress.	What occurs at a CISD (Critical Incident Stress Debriefing) meeting?
When dealing with multiple patients, what is very important to remember?	In this sitaution, remember to change gloves between contact with different patients.
In this sitaution, remember to change gloves between contact with different patients.	When dealing with multiple patients, what is very important to remember?
What is the most common cause of the spread of infectious disease in the field?	The most common cause of this is the careless handling of infected needles or scalpels. Never recap and dispose in sharps containers.
The most common cause of this is the careless handling of infected needles or scalpels. Never recap and dispose in sharps containers.	What is the most common cause of the spread of infectious disease in the field?
When is the first thing an EMT-B should do upon arriving at the scene of a hzardous materials incident?	The first thing to do is attempt to identify the safety placard and allow specialized teams, such as the fire department or Hazmat teams, handle the situation.
The first thing to do is attempt to identify the safety placard and allow specialized teams, such as the fire department or Hazmat teams, handle the situation.	When is the first thing an EMT-B should do upon arriving at the scene of a hzardous materials incident?
What is the simplest, most effective ways to control disease transmission?	This is handwashing.
This is handwashing.	What is the simplest, most effective ways to control disease transmission?
How is tuberculosis transmitted?	This is transmitted via inhaled airborne droplets.
This is transmitted via inhaled airborne droplets.	How is tuberculosis transmitted?
What gas is responsible for more deaths each year than any other by-product of combustion?	This is carbon monoxide.
This is carbon monoxide.	What gas is responsible for more deaths each year than any other by-product of combustion?
During a potentially violent situation such as a civil disturbance, how should you utilize law enforcement?	In this situation, use law enforcement to ensure that bystanders keep a safe distance from you, and to ensure that the scene remains safe.
In this situation, use law enforcement to ensure that bystanders keep a safe distance from you, and to ensure that the scene remains safe.	During a potentially violent situation such as a civil disturbance, how should you utilize law enforcement?
What are some signs of hepatitis?	Some signs of this are: fever, loss of appetite, jaundice, and, fatigue.
Some signs of this are: fever, loss of appetite, jaundice, and, fatigue.	What are some signs of hepatitis?
What should you do if you suspect that an infected person's blood or body fluid has entered your system?	In this situation, you should seek medical advice and care as soon as possible. Based on the degree of exposure, the physician may suggest immediate treatment.
In this situation, you should seek medical advice and care as soon as possible. Based on the degree of exposure, the physician may suggest immediate treatment.	What should you do if you suspect that an infected person's blood or body fluid has entered your system?
What is direct contact?	This is the exposure of a communicable disease from one person to another.
This is the exposure of a communicable disease from one person to another.	What is direct contact?
What is Body Substance Isolation (BSI)?	This is a concept based on the assumption that all body fluids are potentially infectious.
This is a concept based on the assumption that all body fluids are potentially infectious.	What is Body Substance Isolation (BSI)?
What is meningitis?	This is an inflammation of the meningeal coverings of the brain and the spinal column.
This is an inflammation of the meningeal coverings of the brain and the spinal column.	What is meningitis?
What is one of the most important safeguards against legal problems?	A complete, accurate report is one of the most important safeguards against this. The courts consider an incomplete or untidy report to be evidence of incomplete or unexpert care provided.
A complete, accurate report is one of the most important safeguards against this. The courts consider an incomplete or untidy report to be evidence of incomplete or unexpert care provided.	What is one of the most important safeguards against legal problems?
What is an advanced directive (AKA health care directive)?	This is a written document that specifies medical treatment should a competent patient become unable to make decisions.
This is a written document that specifies medical treatment should a competent patient become unable to make decisions.	What is an advanced directive (AKA health care directive)?
What are DNR orders?	These are written documentation that give medical personnel permission not to attempt resuscitation.
These are written documentation that give medical personnel permission not to attempt resuscitation.	What are DNR orders?
What is assualt?	This is anytime you unlawfully place a person in fear of immediate bodily harm without his consent.
This is anytime you unlawfully place a person in fear of immediate bodily harm without his consent.	What is assualt?
What is battery?	This is defined as unlawfully touching a person without his or her consent.
This is defined as unlawfully touching a person without his or her consent.	What is battery?
What is abandonment?	This is unilateral termination of care by the EMT without the patient's consent and without making provisions for transferring care to another medical professional with the skills and training necessary to meet the needs of the patient.
This is unilateral termination of care by the EMT without the patient's consent and without making provisions for transferring care to another medical professional with the skills and training necessary to meet the needs of the patient.	What is abandonment?
What is defamation?	This is the communication of false information about a person that is damaging to that person's reputation or standing in the community.
This is the communication of false information about a person that is damaging to that person's reputation or standing in the community.	What is defamation?
What is expressed consent (AKA actual consent)?	This is a type of consent in which a patient give express authorization for provision of care or transport.
This is a type of consent in which a patient give express authorization for provision of care or transport.	What is expressed consent (AKA actual consent)?
What is implied consent?	This is a type of consent in which a patient who is unable to give consent is given treatment under the legal assumption that he or she would want treatment.
This is a type of consent in which a patient who is unable to give consent is given treatment under the legal assumption that he or she would want treatment.	What is implied consent?
What is informed consent?	This is permission for treatment given by a compentent patient after the potential risks, benefits, and alternatives to treatment have been explained.
This is permission for treatment given by a compentent patient after the potential risks, benefits, and alternatives to treatment have been explained.	What is informed consent?
What are Good Samaritan Laws?	These are statutory provisions enacted by many states to protect citizens from liability for errors and omissions in giving good faith emergency medical care, unless there is wanton, gross, or willful negligence.
These are statutory provisions enacted by many states to protect citizens from liability for errors and omissions in giving good faith emergency medical care, unless there is wanton, gross, or willful negligence.	What are Good Samaritan Laws?
What is breach of duty?	This is anytime the EMT-B does not act within an expected and reasonable standard of care. This includes providing care above the level of your training.
This is anytime the EMT-B does not act within an expected and reasonable standard of care. This includes providing care above the level of your training.	What is breach of duty?
When does an EMT have a legal duty to assist?	EMTs have a legal duty to do this when: They are on duty in their respective jurisdictions, They have begun to respond to an emergency, or, in some cases, departmental policy requires this in an emergency.
EMTs have a legal duty to do this when: They are on duty in their respective jurisdictions, They have begun to respond to an emergency, or, in some cases, departmental policy requires this in an emergency.	When does an EMT have a legal duty to assist?
What are some situations where a minor can be treated as an adult for the purpose of consenting to treatment?	This can occur when the minor is emancipated, pregnant, or married.
This can occur when the minor is emancipated, pregnant, or married.	What are some situations where a minor can be treated as an adult for the purpose of consenting to treatment?
What is the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)?	This is legislation that was passed in 1990 and was designed to protect individuals with disabilities against discrimination.
This is legislation that was passed in 1990 and was designed to protect individuals with disabilities against discrimination.	What is the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)?
What is off-line or indirect medical control?	This is protocol or standing orders that are carried out by the EMT-B when contact with the medical director is not possible.
This is protocol or standing orders that are carried out by the EMT-B when contact with the medical director is not possible.	What is off-line or indirect medical control?
What should you do if a patient refuses treatment?	If this happens, you should: Inform the patient of the potential risks, benefits, treatments, and alternatives. You should also inform the patient about the consequences of refusing treatment and encourage questions. Lastly, you should try to obtain a signature on an official release form acknowledging refusal.
If this happens, you should: Inform the patient of the potential risks, benefits, treatments, and alternatives. You should also inform the patient about the consequences of refusing treatment and encourage questions. Lastly, you should try to obtain a signature on an official release form acknowledging refusal.	What should you do if a patient refuses treatment?
What is the Ryan White Law?	This requires hospital staff to notify a department's designated officer when a patient that the department has cared for has an infectious disease. This law was previously off the books but was re-instituted until 10/2013.
This requires hospital staff to notify a department's designated officer when a patient that the department has cared for has an infectious disease. This law was previously off the books but was re-instituted until 10/2013.	What is the Ryan White Law?
What are some factors you should consider when communicating with your patients?	When doing this, consider these factors: Body language, Verbal choice of words and tone, Culture and background, and Gender and age.
When doing this, consider these factors: Body language, Verbal choice of words and tone, Culture and background, and Gender and age.	What are some factors you should consider when communicating with your patients?
What is a repeater?	This receives messages and frequencies on one frequency and then automatically transmits them on a second, higher frequency.
This receives messages and frequencies on one frequency and then automatically transmits them on a second, higher frequency.	What is a repeater?
What should you include in your oral report to hospital staff?	Keep this complete but precise. Provide name, age, chief complaint, mechanism of injury, important history, treatment, vital signs, and pertinent information.
Keep this complete but precise. Provide name, age, chief complaint, mechanism of injury, important history, treatment, vital signs, and pertinent information.	What should you include in your oral report to hospital staff?
What is a trunking system?	In this system, several radio frequencies are assigned to a group, and each time a radio conversation starts, a computer picks up the next available frequency automatically.
In this system, several radio frequencies are assigned to a group, and each time a radio conversation starts, a computer picks up the next available frequency automatically.	What is a trunking system?
What is a base station?	This is any radio hardware containing a transmitter and receiver located in a fixed place. It may be used in a single place using a microphone, or remotely using telephone lines.
This is any radio hardware containing a transmitter and receiver located in a fixed place. It may be used in a single place using a microphone, or remotely using telephone lines.	What is a base station?
What are the functions of the EMS dispatcher?	Function of this person include: Screening calls and assigning priority, Selecting and alerting the appropriate EMS unit, dispatching and directing the responding EMS unit, coordinating EMS units with other public safety services, and, providing emergency medical instructions to the caller.
Function of this person include: Screening calls and assigning priority, Selecting and alerting the appropriate EMS unit, dispatching and directing the responding EMS unit, coordinating EMS units with other public safety services, and, providing emergency medical instructions to the caller.	What are the functions of the EMS dispatcher?
How many watts of power do VHF mobile radios operate at?	These operate at 100 watts of power, and are mounted in mobile vehicles.
These operate at 100 watts of power, and are mounted in mobile vehicles.	How many watts of power do VHF mobile radios operate at?
How many watts of power do handsets operate at?	These transmit at 1 to 10 watts.
These transmit at 1 to 10 watts.	How many watts of power do handsets operate at?
What should you do if you discover an error while writing a report?	In this situation, draw a single horizontal line through the error, initial it, and write the correct information next to it.
In this situation, draw a single horizontal line through the error, initial it, and write the correct information next to it.	What should you do if you discover an error while writing a report?
What is an important rule of thumb when speaking on the radio?	An important rule of thumb is to always repeat back what you are told.
An important rule of thumb is to always repeat back what you are told.	What is an important rule of thumb when speaking on the radio?
What is the Federal Communications Commission (AKA FCC) responsible for?	This is reponsible for allocating specific radio frequencies to EMS providers, licensing base stations, establishing licensing standards, establishing limitations for transmitter power output, and monitoring radio operations.
This is reponsible for allocating specific radio frequencies to EMS providers, licensing base stations, establishing licensing standards, establishing limitations for transmitter power output, and monitoring radio operations.	What is the Federal Communications Commission (AKA FCC) responsible for?
What is therapeutic communication?	This is using communication strategies and techniques to encourage patients to honestly express how they are feeling, and initiate a positive relationship with the patient.
This is using communication strategies and techniques to encourage patients to honestly express how they are feeling, and initiate a positive relationship with the patient.	What is therapeutic communication?
How can you improve handheld radio strength?	To improve the efficiency of this, go to a higher location with minimal obstructions. Also, a weak battery or loose or damaged antenna can affect performance.
To improve the efficiency of this, go to a higher location with minimal obstructions. Also, a weak battery or loose or damaged antenna can affect performance.	How can you improve handheld radio strength?
What information should be given to the receiving nurse or physician?	Give the following to this person: Patient's name, Vital signs, A summary of past medical history, and the patient's response to any treatment that you rendered.   Remember to keep the report concise and to the point.
Give the following to this person: Patient's name, Vital signs, A summary of past medical history, and the patient's response to any treatment that you rendered.   Remember to keep the report concise and to the point.	What information should be given to the receiving nurse or physician?
What should you include on a Patiet Care Report (PCR)?	In short, simply state the facts and medically relevant information in this. Remember also that this is part of the patient's permanent medical record.
In short, simply state the facts and medically relevant information in this. Remember also that this is part of the patient's permanent medical record.	What should you include on a Patiet Care Report (PCR)?
What is the most effective delivery of oxygen to the lungs in the long term?	An endotracheal tube provides the most effective delivery of this.
An endotracheal tube provides the most effective delivery of this.	What is the most effective delivery of oxygen to the lungs in the long term?
How do you calculate the correct-sized endotracheal tube for pediatric patients?	For this type of patient, you should add 16 to the patient's age, then divide that number by 4. Another method is to select a tube that roughly equals the size of the diameter of the patient's little finger across the nail bed.
For this type of patient, you should add 16 to the patient's age, then divide that number by 4. Another method is to select a tube that roughly equals the size of the diameter of the patient's little finger across the nail bed.	How do you calculate the correct-sized endotracheal tube for pediatric patients?
What is an end tidal carbon dioxide detector used primarily for?	One use of this is to confirm proper placement of an Endotracheal Tube (ETT), as the detector reacts to levels of carbon dioxide produced during exhalation.
One use of this is to confirm proper placement of an Endotracheal Tube (ETT), as the detector reacts to levels of carbon dioxide produced during exhalation.	What is an end tidal carbon dioxide detector used primarily for?
How long should an ETT insertion take?	This should take no longer than 30 seconds, as lengthy attempts at intubating can result in severe hypoxia, especially if the patient is not adequately hyperventilated with high-flow oxygen before the attempt.
This should take no longer than 30 seconds, as lengthy attempts at intubating can result in severe hypoxia, especially if the patient is not adequately hyperventilated with high-flow oxygen before the attempt.	How long should an ETT insertion take?
What is the next step after placing an ETT in a patient who is unconscious and unresponsive?	The next step after this is to inflate the soft-balloon cuff on the end of the tube with 5 - 10 mL of air. This will seal the trachea and anchor the tube so that air be blown directly into the lungs. Once the cuff is inflated, you should attach the BVM device and begin ventilating.
The next step after this is to inflate the soft-balloon cuff on the end of the tube with 5 - 10 mL of air. This will seal the trachea and anchor the tube so that air be blown directly into the lungs. Once the cuff is inflated, you should attach the BVM device and begin ventilating.	What is the next step after placing an ETT in a patient who is unconscious and unresponsive?
What are some contraindications to the use of a mutli-lumen airway device?	Contraindications for this include: patients who are conscious or semi-conscious with a gag reflex, children younger than 16 years of age, adults shorter than 5 feet tall, patients who have ingested a caustic substance, and, patients who have a known esophageal disease.
Contraindications for this include: patients who are conscious or semi-conscious with a gag reflex, children younger than 16 years of age, adults shorter than 5 feet tall, patients who have ingested a caustic substance, and, patients who have a known esophageal disease.	What are some contraindications to the use of a mutli-lumen airway device?
In patients with suspected spinal injury, what should you do while attempting oral intubation?	In these kinds of patients, remember to provide manual spinal immobilization during intubation.
In these kinds of patients, remember to provide manual spinal immobilization during intubation.	In patients with suspected spinal injury, what should you do while attempting oral intubation?
When using a disposable plastic end-tidal CO2 detector as a secondary method of confirming proper tube placement, what color should the chemically treated paper turn to indicate proper tube placement?	This changes from purple to yellow in the presence of exhaled carbon dioxide.
This changes from purple to yellow in the presence of exhaled carbon dioxide.	When using a disposable plastic end-tidal CO2 detector as a secondary method of confirming proper tube placement, what color should the chemically treated paper turn to indicate proper tube placement?
When the ETT is properly positioned, where should the cuff be situated?	This should be situated just past the vocal cords when it is properly positioned.
This should be situated just past the vocal cords when it is properly positioned.	When the ETT is properly positioned, where should the cuff be situated?
What does the absence of bilaterally equal breath sounds in an intubated patient in cardiac arrest mean?	The absence of this in an intubated patient in cardiac arrest indicates that you inadvertently intubated the esophagus. You must immediately remove the tube, and then hyperventilate the patient for at least 2 -3 minutes prior to another attempt.
The absence of this in an intubated patient in cardiac arrest indicates that you inadvertently intubated the esophagus. You must immediately remove the tube, and then hyperventilate the patient for at least 2 -3 minutes prior to another attempt.	What does the absence of bilaterally equal breath sounds in an intubated patient in cardiac arrest mean?
When is endotracheal intubation indicated?	This is indicated in unresponsive patients without a gag reflex or the ability to cough.
This is indicated in unresponsive patients without a gag reflex or the ability to cough.	When is endotracheal intubation indicated?
What is the curved (Macintosh) blade used for?	This is inserted just in front of the epiglottis, into the vallecula (the space between the base of the tongue and the epiglottis), indirectly allowing you to see the glottic opening and vocal cords.
This is inserted just in front of the epiglottis, into the vallecula (the space between the base of the tongue and the epiglottis), indirectly allowing you to see the glottic opening and vocal cords.	What is the curved (Macintosh) blade used for?
What is the proper size for an endotracheal tube for an adult male patient?	The proper-sized endotracheal tube for these kinds of patients range from 7.5 to 8.5 mm. A good rule of thumb is to always have a 7.5 mm ETT on hand at all times, as this will fit most male and female (6.5 - 8 mm) patients.
The proper-sized endotracheal tube for these kinds of patients range from 7.5 to 8.5 mm. A good rule of thumb is to always have a 7.5 mm ETT on hand at all times, as this will fit most male and female (6.5 - 8 mm) patients.	What is the proper size for an endotracheal tube for an adult male patient?
What is the most common error made during endotracheal intubation?	The most common error in this procedure is accidenlt advancing the tube too far into the right mainstream bronchus.
The most common error in this procedure is accidenlt advancing the tube too far into the right mainstream bronchus.	What is the most common error made during endotracheal intubation?
How many mL of air should it take to inflate an ETT cuff?	If done correctly, it should take no more than 5 to 10 mL of air to inflate the cuff and secure the airway.
If done correctly, it should take no more than 5 to 10 mL of air to inflate the cuff and secure the airway.	How many mL of air should it take to inflate an ETT cuff?
What is the first key rule of lifting?	The first key rule of this is to always keep your back in an upright position and lift without twisting.
The first key rule of this is to always keep your back in an upright position and lift without twisting.	What is the first key rule of lifting?
What is the safest and most powerful way to lift?	The power lift is this kind of lift.
The power lift is this kind of lift.	What is the safest and most powerful way to lift?
How many rescuers should you use whenever possible, and who is responsible for coordinating the moves?	You should try to have four of these whenever resourcers allow; the team leader is responsible for this.
You should try to have four of these whenever resourcers allow; the team leader is responsible for this.	How many rescuers should you use whenever possible, and who is responsible for coordinating the moves?
What is the most commonly used device to move and transport patients?	The wheeled ambulance stretcher is the most commonly used one of these.
The wheeled ambulance stretcher is the most commonly used one of these.	What is the most commonly used device to move and transport patients?
What are devices used to carry patients?	Types of these devices include: The wheeled ambulance stretchers, Portable stretchers, Flexible stretchers, Backboards, Basket stretchers (AKA Stokes litters), Scoop stretchers, and, Stair chairs.
Types of these devices include: The wheeled ambulance stretchers, Portable stretchers, Flexible stretchers, Backboards, Basket stretchers (AKA Stokes litters), Scoop stretchers, and, Stair chairs.	What are devices used to carry patients?
What is bariatrics?	This is a branch of medicine concerned with the management, prevention and control of obesity and allied diseases.
This is a branch of medicine concerned with the management, prevention and control of obesity and allied diseases.	What is bariatrics?
What is a basket stretcher (AKA a Stokes litter)?	This is a rigid stretcher commonly used in technical and water rescues that surrounds and supports the patient yet allows water to drain through holes in the bottom.
This is a rigid stretcher commonly used in technical and water rescues that surrounds and supports the patient yet allows water to drain through holes in the bottom.	What is a basket stretcher (AKA a Stokes litter)?
What is a diamond carry?	This is a carrying technique in which one EMT is located at the head end of the stretcher or backboard, one at the foot end, and one at each side of the patient; each of the EMTs at the sides use one hand to support the stretcher / backboard so that all are able to face forward as they walk.
This is a carrying technique in which one EMT is located at the head end of the stretcher or backboard, one at the foot end, and one at each side of the patient; each of the EMTs at the sides use one hand to support the stretcher / backboard so that all are able to face forward as they walk.	What is a diamond carry?
What is the direct ground lift?	This is a lifting technique that is used for patients who are found lying supine on the ground with no suspected spinal injury.
This is a lifting technique that is used for patients who are found lying supine on the ground with no suspected spinal injury.	What is the direct ground lift?
What is an emergency move?	This is a move in which the patient is dragged or pulled from a dangerous scene before assessment and care are provided.
This is a move in which the patient is dragged or pulled from a dangerous scene before assessment and care are provided.	What is an emergency move?
What is an extremity lift?	This is a lifting technique that is used for patients who are supine or in a sitting position with no suspected extremity or spinal injury.
This is a lifting technique that is used for patients who are supine or in a sitting position with no suspected extremity or spinal injury.	What is an extremity lift?
What is a flexible stretcher?	This is a stretcher that is a rigid carrying device when secured around a patient but can be folded or rolled when not in use.
This is a stretcher that is a rigid carrying device when secured around a patient but can be folded or rolled when not in use.	What is a flexible stretcher?
What is a portable stretcher?	This is a stretcher with a strong rectangular tubular metal frame and rigid fabric stretched across it.
This is a stretcher with a strong rectangular tubular metal frame and rigid fabric stretched across it.	What is a portable stretcher?
What is a power grip?	This is a technique in which the litter or backboard is gripped by inserting each hand under the handle with the palm facing up and the thumb extended, fully supporting the underside of the handle on the curved palm with the fingers and thumb.
This is a technique in which the litter or backboard is gripped by inserting each hand under the handle with the palm facing up and the thumb extended, fully supporting the underside of the handle on the curved palm with the fingers and thumb.	What is a power grip?
What is the power lift?	This is a lifting technique in which the EMTs' back is held upright, with legs bent, and the patient is lifted when the EMT straightens the legs to raise the upper body and arms.
This is a lifting technique in which the EMTs' back is held upright, with legs bent, and the patient is lifted when the EMT straightens the legs to raise the upper body and arms.	What is the power lift?
What is the rapid extrication technique?	This is a technique to move a patient from a sitting position inside a vehicle to supine on a backboard in less than 1 minute when conditions do not allow for standard immobilization.
This is a technique to move a patient from a sitting position inside a vehicle to supine on a backboard in less than 1 minute when conditions do not allow for standard immobilization.	What is the rapid extrication technique?
