#separator:tab
#html:false
What are the two main layers of the skin?	Epidermis and the Dermis
What is the most common cell type (90%) of stratified squamous epithelial tissue?	Keratinocytes
What kind of cell secretes melanin?	Melanocytes
What are the five layers of the epidermis, from deepest to superficial?	- Stratum basale - Stratum spinosum - Stratum granulosum - Stratum lucidum - Stratum corneum
What is the function of epidermal ridges?	Grip and tactile ability.
What type of CT is the hypodermis made of?	DICT and Adipose CT
Gives skin a yellow - orange tone if less melanin is present.	Carotene
What is jaundice?	Due to the presence of yellow bilirubin in skin and white area of eye; indicates liver disease.
T/F: Thin skin has epidermal ridges and lacks hair follicles.	False: Thick skin has epidermal ridges and lacks hair follicles.
What are the three components of a hair follicle?	- Bulb - Papilla - Hair Root Plexus
What are the three types of skin glands:	a) Sebacious Glands b) Sudoriferous Glands c) Ceruminous Glands
What kind of skin glands produces sebum?	Sebacious Glands
What are the two types of sweat glands?	Eccrine and apocrine sweat glands.
Actively growing part of the nail:	Nail matrix.
What is included in apocrine sweat glands that is not included in eccrine sweat glands?	Lipids and proteins.
T/F: Radiation is defined as transfer of heat between 2 objects in direct contact with each other:	False: Conduction is the transfer of heat between 2 objects in direct contact with eachother.
Give some examples of effectors that counteract an increase in body temperature:	Sweat glands producing sweat, dermal blood vessels vasodilating.
Give some examples of effectors that counteract a decrease in body temperature:	- Arrector pili muscles contract and hair stands up to trap heat. - Dermal blood vessels vasoconstrict so blood retains heat in deep tissue. - Skeletal muscle contracts (shivering)
T/F: Another integumentary function includes the synthesis of Vitamin D:	True
What is the vernix caseosa?	A covering for the skin during fetal developement; a waxy lipid rich protective biofilm.
What is the basic cause of wrinkling?	Breakdown of collagen and elastic fibers in the dermis.
What causes grey hair in old age?	Decrease in number of melanocytes.
