#separator:tab
#html:false
Which part of the mesoderm do the pharyngeal arches derive from?	Paraxial and lateal plate
What type of cells migrate into the arches to ontribute tot he skeletal component of the pharyngeal arches?	Neural crest cells
Dorsal prominence of the first pharyngeal arch.	Maxillary process
Ventral prominence of the first pharyngeal arch	Mandibular process
Mickel's cartilage belong to which pharyngeal arch?	1st
What bony and ligamentous structures develop from Mickel's cartilage?	Incus and malleus, sphenomandibular ligament, lingula and mandible
Muscles of the1st pharyngeal arch.	Mastication (temporal, masseter and pterygoids) Mylohyoid Anterior bell digastric Tensor tympani Tensor veli palatini
Nerve of the 1st pharyngeal arch?	Mandibular nerve, from trigeminal
Cartilage of the second pharyngeal arch	Reichert's cartilage
Reichert's cartilage gives rise to which bony structures?	Stapes, styloid process, stylohyoid ligament and lesser horn and superior part of body of hyoid bone
Musclar derivatives of the 2nd pharyngeal arch.	Buccinator, platysma, stapedius, stylohypod, posterior bell of digastric
Nerve of second pharyngeal arch	Facial nerve
Cartilage of the third pharyngeal arch gives rise to...	Lower part of the body and the greater horn of the hyoid bone
Muscular derivatives of the 3rd pharyngeal arch.	Stylopharyngeus
Nerve of the 3rd pharygneal arch.	Glossopharyngeal nerve
Cartilage of the 4th and 6th pharyngeal arches form...	Cartilage of the larynx-thyroid, cricoid, arytenoid, corniculate and cuneiform cartilages
Muscular derivatives of the 4th pharyngeal arch.	Constrictors of pharynx, cricothyroid and levator veli palatini
Nerve of the 4th pharyngeal arch	Superior laryngeal nerve from vagus nerve
Muscular derivatives of the 6th pharyngeal arch	Intrinsic muscles of the larynx
Nerve of the 6th pharyngeal arch.	Recurrent laryngeal nerve from vagus nerve
1st pharyngeal pouch expands and becomes what structure that also contributes to the tympanic membrane?	Tubotympanic recess which becoems the tympanic cavity and mastoid antrum
Part of the 2nd pharyngeal pouch remains as what structure?	Tonsillar fossa
The dorsal and ventral parts of the epithelium of the 3rd phargneal pouch forms which structures, respectively?	Dorsal: inferior parathyroid gland Ventral: thymus gland
The dosal and ventral parts of the 4th pharyngeal pouch develop into which structures, respectively?	Dorsal: superior parathyroid gland Ventral: ultimopharyngeal body with parafollicular cells (C-Cells) that produce calcitonin.
1st pharyngeal cleft persists as what structure?	External acoustic meatus
2nd, 3rd, and 4th pharyngeal clefts lie in a slit-like depression that obliterates and is known as...	Cervical sinus
1st pharyngeal membrane becomes what structure?	Tympanic membrane
Congenital condition: Remnants of parts of cervical sinus and/or second cleft. Often lie free in neck, inferior to angle of mandible.  No usually apparent until late childhood or early adulthood Gradually enlarging, painless	Lateral branchial (cervical) cyst
Condition that results from failure of 2nd cleft and ervical sinus to obliterate. Sinus typically opens along anterior border of sternocleidomastoid muscle in the inferior third of the neck.	External cervical sinuses
Results from the persistence of the proximal part of the 2nd pouch. Opens into the tonsillar sinus or near the palatopharyngeal arch.	Internal cervical sinuses
Abnormal canal that typically opens internally into the tonsillar sinus and externalliy in the side of the neck. The canal results from persistence of parts of the 2nd groove and second pouch.	Branchal (cervical) fistula
Autosomal dominant disorder characterized by hypoplasia of maxilla, mandible and zygomatic arches, defects of lower eyelids, deformed external ears and defects of middle and internal ears.	Teacher Collins syndrome (mandibulofascial dysostosis)
Hypoplasia of mandible, cleft palate and defects of the eyes and ears. Micrognathia (small mandible) results in posterior displacement of tongue and obstruction to full closure of palatal processes resulting in bilateral cleft palate.	Robin sequence
Patients born without a thymus and parathyroid glands and defects in cardiac outflow tracts. Symptoms: hypoparathyroidism, susceptifle to infections, mouth birth defects, lowe set and notched ears, nasal clefts and cardiac abnormalities.	DiGeorge syndrome
Isolated mass of thymic tissue persisting in the neck, often lying close to an inferior parathyroid gland.	Accessory thymic tissue
Found anywhere near or within the thyroid gland or thymus. Occassionally, an inferior gland bay lie near the carotid bifucation.	Ectopic parathyroid gland
The anterior two thirds of the tongue develops from what what two structures? From what pharyngeal arch? What nerve innervation?	Lateral lingual swellings 1st pharyngeal arch Mandibular nerve, branch fo trigeminal
Posterior 1/3 of the tongue develops from what structure? What nerve innervation?	Hypopharyngeal eminence Glossopharyngeal
Epiglotiss develops from which pharyngeal arch? Nerve supply?	4th Vagus
Muscular portions of the tongue are innervated by?	Occipital myotomes
Taste buds of the anterior two thirds of the tongue is innervated by?	Chorda tympani, branch of facial nerve
Vallate papillae in the anterior part of the tongue is innervated by which nerve?	Glossopharyngeal nerve of the 3rd arch
Extreme posterior part of the posterior third tongue is supplued by...	Superior laryngeal branch of the vagus, of the 4th arch
All muscles of the tongue are supplied by which nerve? Except which muscle and what is it supplied by?	Hypoglossal nerve Palatoglossues; from pharyngeal plexus from fibers from the vagus nerve
Common name for ankyloglossia	Tongue tie
Condition when the frenulum is short and extends to the tip of the tongue.	Ankyloglossia (tongue tie)
Common name for Glossoschisis	Bifid or Cleft tongue
Results from incomplete fusion of the lateral lingual swellings	Bifid or cleft tongue
First endocrine gland to develop in the embryo.	Thyroid gland
Structure that connects the thyroid gland to the tongue.	Thyroglossal duct; which later disappears
Remnant of the thyroglossal duct may persist and form a cyst in the tongue or anterior neck, usually just inferior to the hyoid bone. What is this condition? If this ruptures due to infection, it will form what?	Thyroglossal duct cysts Ruptures- forming a sinus that usually opens in the medial plane of the neck
Glandular tissue along the course of the thyroglossal duct is known as? Most common type?	Ectopic thyroid gland Lingual thyroid glandular tissue
