#separator:tab
#html:false
It is the articulation between two or more bone or rigid parts of the skeleton.	Joint
How many joints are in the body?  What is their importance?	▪ There are 186 joints in the body.  ▪ Joints exhibit a variety of forms and functions.
Joints are classified into:	1) Synovial joint: knee joint  2) Fibrous joints: suture and syndesmosis  3) Cartilaginous joints: primary and secondary.
Define the Fibrous joint:	The articulating surfaces of the bones are joined by fibrous tissue and thus very little or no movement is possible.  ▪ E.g. Sutures of skull.
A type of fibrous joint that unites the bones with fibrous tissue sheet, either a ligament or a fibrous membrane is called ................. .	A syndesmosis type of fibrous joint.
Interosseous membrane between radius and ulna bones is an example of which type of joint?	A syndesmosis type of fibrous joint
Cartilaginous joint has two types:	❶ Primary cartilaginous joint  ❷ Secondary cartilaginous joint
In the Primary cartilaginous joint:	The bones are articulated by hyaline cartilage.  such as: epiphysial plate of long bone.
In the Secondary cartilaginous joint:	The bones are connected by fibrous cartilage.  Such as: intervertebral disc  (intervertebral disc = connects the body of two vertebrae).
What are the Synovial joints?	They are true mobile joints.  Their arrangement permits a great degree of freedom of movement.
In the Synovial joints the articular surfaces of the bones are covered by ..................... separated by a joint cavity.	hyaline cartilage
In the Synovial joints, the cavity of the joint is lined by what?	by synovial membrane,  (which extends from the margins of the articular surface to those of the other).
In the Synovial joints,  what is the capsule of the joint?	Capsule of the joint is a tough fibrous membrane that protects the synovial membrane on the outside
In the Synovial joints,  The articular surfaces are lubricated by a viscous fluid called what?	Called synovial fluid,  (which is produced by synovial membrane).
In the Synovial joints,  The capsule is strengthened by ..................... which unites the bones together.	Ligaments
In the Synovial joints,  Where are the ligaments located?	Some ligaments lie within the capsule, some others lie outside it.
Types of synovial joints:	❶ Plane joints  ❷ Hinge joints  ❸ Pivot joints  ❹ Condyloid joints  ❺ Ellipsoid joints  ❻ Saddle joint  ❼ Ball and socket joints
Plane joints? Example?	The articular surfaces are flat and this permits the bones to slide over one another.  Ex. Acromioclavicular joint.
Hinge joints movements? Example?	Only flexion and extension are possible.  Ex. Elbow, knee, and ankle joints.
Pivot joints? Example?	in which a central bony axis is surrounded by a bony-ligamentous ring and rotation is the only movement possible.     Ex. Atlanto-axial joint and superior radioulnar joints.
Which movements are possible in Condyloid joints? Example?	Flexion, extension, abduction, adduction together with a small amount of rotation are possible,  Ex. Metacarpophalangeal joints.
Is the joint in which there is two different convex surfaces articulate with two concave surfaces?	Condyloid joints
Ellipsoid joints articulation?  Movements?  Example?	an elliptical convex articular surface fits into an elliptical concave articular surface.  Flexion, extension, abduction and adduction are possible with no rotation.  Ex. Wrist joint.
In which joint, the articular surfaces are reciprocally concavo-convex and resemble a saddle on a horse's back?	The Saddle joint.
Saddle joint movements? Example?	Flexion, extension, abduction, adduction and rotation are possible.  Ex. Carpometacarpal joint of the thumb.
In this joint, a ball shaped convex surface fits into a socket like concavity, and It permits free movement.	Ball and socket joints
Ball and socket joints movements? Example?	Flexion, extension, abduction, adduction, medial rotation, lateral rotation and circumduction.  Ex. Shoulder and hip joints
Joints of the head and neck:	❶ Skull sutures.  ❷ Temporo-Mandibular joint.  ❸ Atlanto-Axial joint.  ❹ Cervical Intervertebral joint.
Joints of the Pectoral Girdle:	❶ Sterno-clavicular Joint.  ❷ Acromio-clavicular Joint.  ❸ Gleno-humeral Joint.
Joints of the Pectoral Girdle:     ❶ Sterno-clavicular joint Description:	▪ Articulation:  occurs between the sternal end of the clavicle, the manubrium sterni, and the first costal cartilage.     ▪ Type:  Synovial double-plane joint.
Joints of the Pectoral Girdle:     ❷ Acromioclavicular joint Description:	▪ Articulation:  This occurs between the acromion of the scapula and the lateral end of the clavicle.     ▪ Type:  Synovial plane joint
Type of Glenohumeral joint is?	It is a synovial ball and socket (multi-axial).
Articulation between the head of the humerus and the glenoid cavity of the scapula,  the joint name?	Glenohumeral joint
Glenohumeral joint structurally is a weak joint, why?	Because of Dislocation of Glenohumeral Joint
The Dislocation of Glenohumeral Joint occurs as a result of:	▪ Caused excessive abduction or lateral rotation of the arm.  ▪ The head of the humerus drived inferiorly.
Glenohumeral joint Movements:	Flexion, extension, abduction, adduction, medial rotation, lateral rotation, and circumduction are possible.
Joints of the forearm	❶ Elbow joint.  ❷ Superior Radio-Ulnar Joint.  ❸ Radio-Ulnar Joint.  ❹ Distal Radio-Ulnar Joint.
This joint occurs between the trochlea and capitulum of the humerus and the trochlear notch of the ulna and the head of the radius.     Type: Synovial hinge joint	Elbow joint
The Elbow joint permits only two kinds of movements:	Flexion and Extension
Superior radio-ulnar joint is a type of:	Synovial pivot joint
Possible movements of Superior radio-ulnar joint:	pronation and supination.
The head of the radius with the radial notch of the ulna. The radial head is held in position by the anular ligament of the radius	Articulation of Superior radio-ulnar joint
The radio-ulnar joints definition:	The two ends (upper and lower ends) of the radius and ulna are jointed to each other at the superior and inferior radioulnar joints.
In the radio-ulnar joints, the shaft of the two bones are united by the............. .  (some time called middle radioulnar joint).	interosseous membrane
Distal radio-ulnar joint Articulation:	Between the rounded head of the ulna and the ulnar notch on the radius.
Distal radio-ulnar joint type and possible movements:	▪ Type:  Synovial pivot joint.     ▪ Possible movements  pronation and supination.
It is an injury affecting the elbow joint, and occurs when the radial head is displaced from its normal articulation with the ulna and the humerus.	Subluxation and Dislocation of Radial Head
Subluxation and Dislocation of Radial Head	Subclinical Subluxation:  no symptoms or signs appear     Subluxation:  partial dislocation     Dislocation:  radial head is completely displaced
Wrist joint is:	Radio-Carpal joint
Is between the distal end of radius and the articular disc of ulna above, and the scaphoid, lunate and triquetral bones below.	Wrist joint (Radio-Carpal joint)
Wrist joint (Radio-Carpal joint)  Type & Movement:	▪ Type:  it is a synovial ellipsoid joint.     Movement:  ▪ It allows flexion, extension, abduction and adduction, with no rotation.
Joints of the hands:	❶ Intercarpal joints,  ❷ Carpometacarpal joints,  ❸ Metacarpophalangeal joints,  ❹ Interphalangeal joints.
Joints of lower limb:	❶ Hip joint  ❷ Knee joint  ❸ Tibio-fibular Joints  ❹ Proximal Tibio-Fibular joint  ❺ Distal Tibio-fibular Joint  ❻ Ankle Joint
Is a synovial ball and socket joint, and articulates between the head of the femur and acetabulum	Hip joint
Hip joint Movements:	Flexion, Extension, abduction, adduction, lateral and medial rotation and circumduction
Is the most complex joint of the body.	Knee joint
Articulation of Knee joint:	Between two rounded condyles of femur above and two condyles of the tibia and their cartilaginous menisci.
Knee joint Types:	Between the femur and tibia is a synovial hinge variety,  Between the patella and femur is synovial plane gliding variety.
Extracapsular ligament in the knee joint:	A. Lateral collateral ligament  (separates from lateral meniscus by the tendon of the popliteal muscle)     B. Medial collateral ligament  (is firmly attached to the medial meniscus so injury of ligament lead to damage of medial meniscus)
The intracapsular ligament are two cruciate ligament:	A. Anterior crusciate ligament  B. Posterior crusciate ligament
The menisci of the knee joint:	They are two fibro-cartilaginous discs:     A. Medial meniscus is C shaped.  B. Lateral meniscus circular shape.
Knee Joint Injuries occur when:	Anterior cruciate ligament ( torn )  Tibial collateral ligament ( torn )  Medial meniscus ( torn )
Tibio-fibular Joints  The tibia and fibula are connected by two joints:	❶ the tibiofibular joint  ❷ the tibiofibular syndesmosis (inferiortibiofibular) joint.     (an interosseous membrane joins the shafts of the two bones.)
Proximal Tibio-Fibular joint	* Plane type of synovial joint  * Articulation between the lateral condyle of the tibia and head of the fibula.
Articulation is between the fibular notch a of the tibia and the lower end of the fibula and the joint is a fibrous joint	Distal Tibio-fibular Joint
Ankle Joint Articulation:	Articulation is between the lower end of the tibia, the two malleoli, and the body of the talus.
The ankle is a synovial hinge joint.     True or False?	True
Ankle Joint Movements:	a. Dorsiflexion (toes pointing upward) and  b. Plantar flexion (toes pointing downward) are possible.
The movements of inversion and eversion take place at the tarsal joints and NOT at the ankle joint.     True or False?	True
At the ankle Joint, the movements of inversion and eversion take place at:	take place at the tarsal joints and NOT at the ankle joint.
