#separator:tab
#html:false
A  42-year-old  man  is  admitted  to  the  emergency department after his automobile hit a tree. He is treated for a pelvic fracture and several deep lacerations. Physical examination reveals that dorsiflexion and inversion of  the  left  foot  and  extension  of  the  big  toe  are  very weak.  Sensation  from  the  dorsum  of  the  foot,  skin  of the sole, and the lateral aspect of the foot has been lost and  the  patellar  reflex  is  normal.  The  foot  is  everted and  plantar  flexed.  Which  of  the  following  structures is most likely injured?   A.  The lumbosacral trunk at the linea terminalis   B.  L5 and S1 spinal nerves torn at the intervertebral foramen   C.  Fibular (peroneal) division of the sciatic nerve at the neck of the fibula   D.  Sciatic nerve injury at the greater sciatic foramen (“doorway to the gluteal region”)   E.  Tibial nerve in the popliteal fossa	A.  The lumbosacral trunk at the linea terminalis
A  23-year-old  man  is  admitted  to  the  emergency department  with  a  deep,  bleeding  stab  wound  of  the pelvis. After the bleeding has been arrested, a magnetic resonance  imaging  (MRI)  examination  gives  evidence that  the  right  ventral  primary  ramus  of  L4  has  been transected. Which of the following problems will most likely be seen during physical examination?   A.  Reduction or loss of sensation from the medial aspect of the leg   B.  Loss of the Achilles tendon reflex     C.  Weakness of abduction of the thigh at the hip joint   D.  Inability to evert the foot    E.  Reduction or loss of sensation from the medial aspect of the leg and loss of Achilles tendon reflex	A.  Reduction or loss of sensation from the medial aspect of the leg
A  30-year-old  man  suffered  a  superior  gluteal nerve  injury  in  a  motorcycle  crash  in  which  his  right lower  limb  was  caught  beneath  the  bike.  He  is  stabilized  in  the  emergency  department.  Later  he  is  examined  and  he  exhibits  a  waddling  gait  and  a  positive Trendelenburg  sign.  Which  of  the  following  would  be the most likely physical finding in this patient?   A.  Difficulty in standing from a sitting position   B.  The left side of the pelvis droops or sags when he attempts to stand with his weight supported just by the right lower limb   C.  The right side of the pelvis droops or sags when he attempts to stand with his weight supported just by the left lower limb    D.  Weakened flexion of the right hip    E.  Difficulty in sitting from a standing position	B.  The left side of the pelvis droops or sags when he attempts to stand with his weight supported just by the right lower limb
A 45-year-old man is treated at the hospital after he fell from his bicycle. Radiologic examination reveals fractures  both  of  the  tibia  and  the  fibula.  On  physical examination  the  patient  has  a  foot  drop,  but  normal eversion.  Which  of  the  following  nerves  is most likely injured?   A.  Tibial   B.  Common fibular (peroneal)   C.  Superficial fibular (peroneal)   D.  Saphenous   E.  Deep fibular (peroneal)	E.  Deep fibular (peroneal)
A 49-year-old male construction worker is admitted  to  the  emergency  department  with  a  painful  lump on the proximal medial aspect of his thigh. Radiologic and  physical  examinations  reveal  that  the  patient  has a herniation of abdominal viscera beneath the inguinal ligament into the thigh. Through which of the following openings  will  a  hernia  of  this  type  initially  pass  to extend from the abdomen into the thigh?   A.  Femoral ring   B.  Superficial inguinal ring   C.  Deep inguinal ring   D.  Fossa ovalis   E.  Obturator canal	A.  Femoral ring
A  37-year-old  man  is  admitted  to  the  hospital after  an  injury  to  his  foot  while  playing  flag  football with friends on a Saturday morning. A series of radiographs demonstrates a fracture involving the talocrural (tibiotalar,  ankle)  joint.  Which  movements  are  the major ones to be affected by this injury?   A.  Plantar flexion and dorsiflexion   B.  Inversion and eversion   C.  Plantar flexion, dorsiflexion, inversion, and eversion   D.  Plantar flexion and inversion    E.  Dorsiflexion and eversion	A.  Plantar flexion and dorsiflexion
After  dividing  the  overlying  superficial  tissues and gluteal musculature in a 68-year-old female patient, the orthopedic surgeon carefully identified the underlying structures while performing a total hip arthroplasty. The key landmark in the gluteal region, relied upon in surgical explorations of this area, is provided by which of the following structures?   A.  Gluteus medius   B.  Obturator internus tendon   C.  Sciatic nerve   D.  Piriformis muscle   E.  Spine of the ischium	D.  Piriformis muscle
A  16-year-old  boy  received  a  superficial  cut  on the lateral side of his foot while playing football and is admitted  to  the  emergency  department  where  the wound  is  sutured.  Four  days  later  the  patient  returns to  the  hospital  with  high  fever  and  swollen  lymph nodes.  Which  group  of  nodes  will  first  receive  lymph from the infected wound?   A.  Popliteal   B.  Vertical group of superficial inguinal   C.  Deep inguinal   D.  Horizontal group of superficial inguinal   E.  Internal iliac	A.  Popliteal
A  45-year-old  man  presents  at  the  local  emer- gency  clinic  with  the  complaint  of  a  painful  knee  and difficulty  in  walking.  A  computed  tomography  (CT) scan examination reveals a very large cyst in the popliteal fossa compressing the tibial nerve. Which movement will most likely be affected?   A.  Dorsiflexion of the foot   B.  Flexion of the thigh   C.  Extension of the digits   D.  Extension of the leg   E.  Plantar flexion of the foot	E.  Plantar flexion of the foot
A 19-year-old football player was hit on the lateral side of his knee just as he put that foot on the ground. Unable  to  walk  without  assistance,  he  is  taken  to  the hospital.  An  MRI  examination  reveals  a  torn  medial collateral ligament. Which structure would most likely also be injured due to its attachment to this ligament?   A.  Medial meniscus   B.  Anterior cruciate ligament   C.  Lateral meniscus   D.  Posterior cruciate ligament   E.  Tendon of the semitendinosus	A.  Medial meniscus
A 49-year-old man underwent a coronary bypass graft  procedure  using  the  great  saphenous  vein.  Postoperatively, the patient complains of pain and general lack  of  normal  sensation  on  the  medial  surface  of  the leg  and  foot  on  the  limb  from  which  the  graft  was harvested. Which nerve was most likely injured during surgery?   A.  Common fibular (peroneal)   B.  Superficial fibular (peroneal)   C.  Lateral sural   D.  Saphenous   E.  Tibial	D.  Saphenous
A  22-year-old  football  player  is  admitted  to  the hospital with pain and swelling over the lateral aspect of  the  ankle.  The  emergency  department  doctor  diagnoses  an  inversion  sprain.  Which  ligament  was  most likely injured?   A.  Plantar calcaneonavicular (spring)   B.  Calcaneofibular   C.  Long plantar   D.  Short plantar   E.  Deltoid	B.  Calcaneofibular
A 72-year-old woman is admitted to the hospital with a painful right foot. A CT scan examination reveals a  thrombotic  occlusion  of  the  femoral  artery  in  the proximal part of the adductor canal. Which artery will most likely provide blood supply to the leg through the genicular anastomosis?   A.  Medial circumflex femoral   B.  Descending branch of the lateral circumflex femoral   C.  First perforating branch of the deep femoral     D.  Inferior gluteal    E.  Descending genicular branch of femoral	B.  Descending branch of the lateral circumflex femoral
A 75-year-old woman is admitted to the hospital after  falling  in  her  bathroom.  Radiologic  examination reveals  an  extracapsular  fracture  of  the  femoral  neck. Which artery is most likely at risk for injury?   A.  Inferior gluteal   B.  First perforating branch of deep femoral    C.  Medial circumflex femoral    D.  Obturator    E.  Superior gluteal	C.  Medial circumflex femoral
A  56-year-old  man  with  advanced  bladder  carcinoma  suffers  from  difficulty  while  walking.  Muscle testing  reveals  weakened  adductors  of  the  right  thigh. Which  nerve  is  most  likely  being  compressed  by  the tumor to result in walking difficulty?   A.  Femoral   B.  Obturator   C.  Common fibular (peroneal)   D.  Tibial   E.  Sciatic	B.  Obturator
Upon removal of a knee-high leg cast, a 15-year- old  boy  complains  of  numbness  of  the  dorsum  of  his right  foot  and  inability  to  dorsiflex  and  evert  his  foot. Which is the most probable site of the nerve compression that resulted in these symptoms?   A.  Popliteal fossa   B.  Neck of the fibula   C.  Lateral compartment of the leg   D.  Anterior compartment of the leg   E.  Medial malleolus	B.  Neck of the fibula
A  32-year-old  patient  received  a  badly  placed intramuscular  injection  to  the  posterior  part  of  his gluteal region. The needle injured a motor nerve in the area. Later, he had great difficulty rising to a standing position  from  a  seated  position.  Which  muscle  was most likely affected by the injury?   A.  Gluteus maximus   B.  Gluteus minimus   C.  Hamstrings   D.  Iliopsoas   E.  Obturator internus	A.  Gluteus maximus
During  the  preparation  of  an  evening  meal  a female  medical  student  dropped  a  sharp,  slender kitchen knife. The blade pierced the first web space of her foot, resulting in numbness along adjacent sides of the first and second toes. Which nerve was most likely injured?   A.  Saphenous   B.  Deep fibular (peroneal)   C.  Superficial fibular (peroneal)   D.  Sural   E.  Common fibular (peroneal)	B.  Deep fibular (peroneal)
Following an injury suffered in a soccer match, a 32-year-old woman is examined in a seated position in the orthopedic clinic. Holding the right tibia with both hands, the clinician can press the tibia backward under the  distal  part  of  her  femur.  The  left  tibia  cannot  be displaced in this way. Which structure was most likely damaged in the right knee?   A.  Anterior cruciate ligament   B.  Lateral collateral ligament   C.  Medial collateral ligament   D.  Medial meniscus   E.  Posterior cruciate ligament	E.  Posterior cruciate ligament
A  22-year-old  woman  is  admitted  to  the  emergency  department  after  another  vehicle  collided  with the passenger side of the convertible in which she was riding. Radiologic examination reveals an avulsion fracture  of  the  greater  trochanter.  Which  of  the  following muscles  would  continue  to  function  normally  if  such an injury was incurred?   A.  Piriformis   B.  Obturator internus   C.  Gluteus medius   D.  Gluteus maximus   E.  Gluteus minimus	D.  Gluteus maximus
The  news  reported  that  the  58-year-old  ambassador  received  a  slashing  wound  to  the  medial  thigh and  died  from  exsanguination  in  less  than  2  minutes. What was the most likely nature of his injury?   A.  The femoral artery was cut at the inguinal ligament   B.  A vessel or vessels were injured at the apex of the femoral triangle   C.  The femoral vein was transected at its junction with the saphenous vein   D.  The medial circumflex femoral was severed at its origin   E.  The deep femoral artery was divided at its origin	B.  A vessel or vessels were injured at the apex of the femoral triangle
A  72-year-old  woman  suffered  a  hip  dislocation when she fell down the steps to her garage. Which of the  following  is  most  significant  in  resisting  hyperextension of the hip joint?   A.  Pubofemoral ligament   B.  Ischiofemoral ligament   C.  Iliofemoral ligament   D.  Negative pressure in the acetabular fossa   E.  Gluteus maximus muscle	C.  Iliofemoral ligament
A  75-year-old  man  is  transported  to  the  emergency department with severe pain of his right hip and thigh.  A  radiologic  examination  reveals  avascular necrosis  of  the  femoral  head.  Which  of  the following  conditions  most  likely  occurred  to  produce avascular necrosis in this patient?   A.  Dislocation of the hip with tearing of the ligament of the head of the femur    B.  Intertrochanteric fracture of the femur   C.  Intracapsular femoral neck fracture    D.  Thrombosis of the obturator artery    E.  Comminuted fracture of the extracapsular femoral neck	C.  Intracapsular femoral neck fracture
A 58-year-old male farmer was accidentally struck with a scythe (a long, curved cutting blade) by another worker while they were cutting wheat. He was admitted to the county hospital with severe bleeding. During physical examination the doctor noted that the patient had a foot drop; sensation was present over the dorsum of the foot and the skin of the posterior calf. Which of the following nerves was injured?   A.  Femoral nerve   B.  Sciatic nerve   C.  Superficial fibular (peroneal) nerve   D.  Deep fibular (peroneal) nerve   E.  Common fibular (peroneal) nerve	D.  Deep fibular (peroneal) nerve
A  45-year-old  man  is  admitted  to  the  emergency department after experiencing a sharp pain while lifting a box of books. He told the physician that he “felt the pain in my backside, the back of my thigh, my leg, and the side of my foot.” During physical examination it is observed that his Achilles tendon jerk is weakened on the  affected  side.  Which  is  the  most  likely  cause  of injury?   A.  Disc lesion at L3-4   B.  Disc lesion at L4-5   C.  Disc lesion at L5-S1   D.  Disc lesion at S1-2   E.  Gluteal crush syndrome of the sciatic nerve or piriformis syndrome	C.  Disc lesion at L5-S1
A  55-year-old  woman  is  admitted  to  the  emergency  department  after  an  automobile  crash.  Physical examination  reveals  that  the  patient’s  foot  is  everted and  she  cannot  invert  it.  A  weakness  in  dorsiflexion and inversion of the foot is noted. Her ipsilateral patellar  reflex  is  reduced  in  quality,  although  the  Achilles tendon reflex is brisk. Knee extension is almost normal, as  are  all  hip  movements  and  knee  flexion.  Sensation is greatly reduced on the medial side of the leg. Which of the following nerves is most likely injured?   A.  Femoral nerve   B.  L4 spinal nerve   C.  L4 and L5 spinal nerves   D.  Common fibular (peroneal) nerve   E.  Tibial nerve	B.  L4 spinal nerve
A  46-year-old  woman  stepped  on  a  broken  wine bottle on the sidewalk and the sharp glass entered the posterior part of her foot. The patient was admitted to the  hospital,  and  a  physical  examination  concluded that her lateral plantar nerve had been transected (cut through). Which of the following conditions will most likely be confirmed by further physical examination?   A.  Loss of sensation over the plantar surface of the third toe   B.  Paralysis of the abductor hallucis     C.  Paralysis of the interossei and adductor hallucis   D.  Flexor hallucis brevis paralysis    E.  Flexor digitorum brevis paralysis	C.  Paralysis of the interossei and adductor hallucis
A  22-year-old  male  martial  arts  competitor  was examined by the clinician because of pain and serious disability  suffered  from  a  kick  to  the  side  of  his  knee. Physical examination revealed a dark bruise just distal to  the  head  of  the  fibula.  Which  of  the  following muscles will most likely be paralyzed?   A.  Tibialis anterior and extensor digitorum longus   B.  Tibialis posterior     C.  Soleus and gastrocnemius    D.  Plantaris and popliteus     E.  Flexor digitorum longus and flexor hallucis longus	A.  Tibialis anterior and extensor digitorum longus
A  61-year-old  female  immigrant  had  been  diagnosed with spinal tuberculosis. The woman had developed a fluctuant, red, tender bulge on one flank, with a  similar  bulge  in  the  groin  on  the  same  side.  This presentation  is  likely  due  to  spread  of  disease  process within the fascia of a muscle with which of the following actions at the hip?   A.  Abduction   B.  Adduction   C.  Extension   D.  Flexion   E.  Internal rotation	D.  Flexion
In an accident during cleanup of an old residential area  of  the  city,  the  Achilles  tendon  of  a  32-year-old worker was cut through by the blade of a brush cutter. The patient is admitted to the hospital and a laceration of  the  Achilles  tendon  is  diagnosed.  Which  of  the  following  bones  serves  as  an  insertion  for  the  Achilles tendon?   A.  Calcaneus   B.  Fibula   C.  Cuboid   D.  Talus   E.  Navicular	A.  Calcaneus
A 27-year-old female tennis pro injured her ankle during the quarterfinal match. A physical examination at  the  outpatient  clinic  revealed  a  severe  inversion sprain  of  the  ankle.  Which  of  the  following  structures is most commonly damaged in such injuries?   A.  Medial plantar nerve   B.  Tibial nerve   C.  Anterior talofibular ligament   D.  Posterior talofibular ligament   E.  Deltoid ligament	C.  Anterior talofibular ligament
A  41-year-old  man  is  admitted  to  the  emergency department with a swollen and painful foot. Radiologic examination  reveals  that  the  head  of  the  talus  has become displaced inferiorly, thereby causing the medial longitudinal arch of the foot to fall. What would be the most likely cause in this case?   A.  Tearing of the plantar calcaneonavicular (spring) ligament   B.  Fracture of the cuboid bone    C.  Interruption of the plantar aponeurosis    D.  Sprain of the anterior talofibular ligament     E.  Sprain of the deltoid ligament	A.  Tearing of the plantar calcaneonavicular (spring) ligament
During a football game a 21-year-old wide receiver was illegally blocked by a linebacker, who threw himself against  the  posterolateral  aspect  of  the  runner’s  left knee. As he lay on the ground, the wide receiver grasped his knee in obvious pain. Which of the following structures  is  frequently  subject  to  injury  from  this  type  of force against the knee?   A.  Fibular collateral ligament   B.  Anterior cruciate ligament   C.  Lateral meniscus and posterior cruciate ligament   D.  Fibular collateral and posterior cruciate ligament   E.  All the ligaments of the knee will be affected	B.  Anterior cruciate ligament
Lower limb angiography of an 82-year-old woman reveals  a  possible  cause  for  her  limb  pain  during  her workout routines in the health spa. The artery that was occluded  is  one  that  should  have  been  demonstrable passing between the proximal part of the space between the tibia and fibula. Which of the following arteries is most likely affected?   A.  Deep femoral   B.  Popliteal   C.  Posterior tibial   D.  Fibular (peroneal)   E.  Anterior tibial	E.  Anterior tibial
A  43-year-old  man  visits  the  outpatient  clinic with a painful, swollen knee joint. The patient’s history reveals chronic gonococcal arthritis. A knee aspiration is ordered for bacterial culture of the synovial fluid. A standard suprapatellar approach is used, and the needle passes  from  the  lateral  aspect  of  the  thigh  into  the region immediately proximal to and deep to the patella. Through  which  of  the  following  muscles  would  the needle pass?   A.  Adductor magnus   B.  Short head of biceps femoris   C.  Rectus femoris   D.  Sartorius   E.  Vastus lateralis	E.  Vastus lateralis
A  34-year-old  male  power  lifter  visits  the  outpa- tient  clinic  because  he  has  difficulty  walking.  During physical examination it is observed that the patient has a problem unlocking the knee joint to permit flexion of the leg. Which of the following muscles is most likely damaged?    A.  Biceps femoris    B.  Gastrocnemius    C.  Popliteus    D.  Semimembranosus    E.  Rectus femoris	C.  Popliteus
A 32-year-old male basketball player comes down hard  on  his  ankle.  He  is  admitted  to  the  outpatient clinic, and radiologic examination reveals a Pott’s fracture. What ligament is most likely injured?   A.  Calcaneofibular ligament   B.  Deltoid ligament   C.  Spring ligament   D.  Plantar ligament   E.  Long plantar ligament	B.  Deltoid ligament
A  23-year-old  man  is  admitted  to  the  emergency department  with  pain  and  cyanosis  of  his  right  lower limb.  Doppler  ultrasound  studies  reveal  deficiency  in development  of  his  femoral  artery,  which  appears  to terminate midthigh. A thrombotic occlusion is seen in an  unusual,  rather  tortuous,  large  vessel  in  the  poste- rior  compartment  of  the  thigh,  arising  in  the  gluteal area and continuous inferiorly with a normal appearing popliteal  artery.  It  is  decided  that  a  vascular  graft should be placed from the femoral artery to the popliteal artery. What is the identity of the aberrant artery?   A.  A large, fifth perforating branch of the femoral   B.  An sciatic branch of the inferior gluteal artery     C.  Descending branch of the medial circumflex femoral   D.  Descending branch of the superior gluteal artery   E.  An enlarged descending lateral circumflex femoral artery	B.  An sciatic branch of the inferior gluteal artery
When  he  attempted  to  lift  one  side  of  his  new electric automobile from the ground to demonstrate his strength, a 51-year-old man felt a sharp pain in his back and quickly dropped the vehicle. Upon examination, it is observed that the patient has deficits in sensation on the dorsum and sole of his foot and marked weakness in  abduction  and  lateral  rotation  of  the  lower  limb. What was the nature of his injury?   A.  Piriformis syndrome, with entrapment of the sciatic nerve    B.  Disc lesion at L3-4     C.  Disc lesion at L4-5   D.  Disc lesion at L5-S1    E.  Posterior hip dislocation	C.  Disc lesion at L4-5
A  43-year-old  woman  is  examined  by  a  neurologist, to whom she complains of pain in her lower limb of 6 months’ duration. She has pain in the gluteal area, thigh, and leg. The neurologist observes reduced sensation  over  the  dorsum  and  lateral  side  of  the  involved foot and some weakness in foot dorsiflexion and eversion. A diagnosis of a piriformis entrapment syndrome is  made,  with  compression  of  the  fibular  (peroneal) division  of  the  sciatic  nerve.  Which  of  the  following conditions  did  the  neurologist  also  most  likely  find during her physical examination of the patient?   A.  Paralysis of plantar flexion   B.  Instability of the knee, due to paralysis of the quadriceps femoris   C.  Foot drop    D.  Spasm or clonic contractures of the adductor musculature of the thigh   E.  Loss of sensation in the gluteal area, by paralysis of anterior cluneal nerves	C.  Foot drop
Three years following a 62-year-old’s hip replacement,  the  man’s  CT  scans  indicated  that  two  of  his larger hip muscles had been replaced by adipose tissue. The  opinion  is  offered  that  his  superior  gluteal  nerve could have been injured during the replacement procedure, and the muscles supplied by that nerve had atrophied and been replaced by fat. Which of the following muscles  receives  its  innervation  from  the  superior gluteal nerve?   A.  Tensor fasciae latae   B.  Rectus femoris   C.  Gluteus maximus   D.  Piriformis   E.  Quadratus femoris	A.  Tensor fasciae latae
A popliteal arterial aneurysm can be very fragile, bursting with great loss of blood and the potential loss of  the  leg  if  it  is  not  dealt  with  safely  and  effectively. In  the  18th  century,  Dr.  John  Hunter  (1728-1793)  discovered that if a primary artery of the thigh is temporarily  compressed,  blood  flow  in  the  popliteal  artery can  be  reduced  long  enough  to  treat  the  aneurysm  in the  popliteal  fossa  surgically,  with  safety.  What  structure is indicated in Fig. 5-3 that is related to his surgical procedure?   A.  Sartorius   B.  Femoral vein   C.  Femoral artery   D.  Gracilis   E.  Adductor brevis	A.  Sartorius
A 49-year-old male worker fell from a ladder, with his weight impacting on the heels of his feet. Radiologic examination  reveals  comminuted  calcaneal  fractures. After  the  injury  the  contraction  of  which  one  of  the following  muscles  could  most  likely  increase  the  pain in the injured foot?   A.  Flexor digitorum profundus   B.  Gastrocnemius   C.  Tibialis posterior   D.  Tibialis anterior   E.  Fibularis (peroneus) longus	B.  Gastrocnemius
A  24-year-old  woman  received  a  small-caliber bullet  wound  to  the  popliteal  fossa  from  a  drive-by assailant.  The  patient  was  admitted  to  the  emergency department,  where  the  surgeons  recognized  that  the bullet  had  severed  the  tibial  nerve.  Such  an  injury would most likely result in which of the following?   A.  Inability to extend the leg at the knee   B.  Foot drop   C.  A dorsiflexed and everted foot   D.  A plantar flexed and inverted foot   E.  Total inability to flex the leg at the knee joint	C.  A dorsiflexed and everted foot
An  82-year-old  grandmother  slipped  on  the  polished floor in her front hall and was transported to the emergency  department  and  admitted  for  examination with a complaint of great pain in her right lower limb. During physical examination it is observed by the resident  that  the  right  lower  limb  is  laterally  rotated  and noticeably shorter than her left limb. Radiologic examination reveals an intracapsular fracture of the femoral neck. Which of the following arteries supplies the head of  the  femur  in  early  childhood  but  no  longer  in  a patient of this age?   A.  Superior gluteal   B.  Lateral circumflex femoral    C.  A branch of the obturator artery    D.  Inferior gluteal    E.  Internal pudendal	C.  A branch of the obturator artery
A 19-year-old patient is admitted to the orthopedic service with a complaint of severe pain in his very swollen and discolored foot. He states that he hurt the foot  when  jumping  from  his  girlfriend’s  bedroom window  to  the  concrete  driveway  below.  Plain  film radiographic  studies  reveal  that  the  head  of  the  talus has  become  displaced  inferiorly,  thereby  causing  the medial longitudinal arch of the foot to fall. What would be the most likely, serious problem in such a case?   A.  Tearing of the plantar calcaneonavicular (spring) ligament   B.  Fracture of the cuboid bone    C.  Interruption of the plantar aponeurosis       D.  Sprain of the anterior talofibular ligament    E.  Disruption of the distal tibiofibular ligament	A.  Tearing of the plantar calcaneonavicular (spring) ligament
A  29-year-old  male  police  officer  is  examined  in a neighborhood clinic, with a complaint of discomfort in  the  lateral  thigh.  The  physician  observes  that  the policeman is rather overweight and that he is wearing a  heavy  leather  belt,  to  which  numerous  objects  are attached, including his empty holster. After a thorough physical  examination  a  diagnosis  of  meralgia  paresthetica is confirmed. Which of the following nerves is most likely involved?   A.  Superior gluteal   B.  Femoral   C.  Obturator   D.  Fibular (peroneal) division of sciatic   E.  Lateral femoral cutaneous	E.  Lateral femoral cutaneous
The swollen and painful left foot of a 23-year-old female long distance runner is examined in the university  orthopedic  clinic.  She  states  that  she  stepped  on an unseen sharp object while running through the park several  days  earlier.  Emergency  surgery  is  ordered  to deal with her tarsal tunnel syndrome. The tarsal tunnel is  occupied  normally  by  tendons,  vessels,  and  nerves that  pass  beneath  a  very  strong  band  of  tissue  (flexor retinaculum) on the medial side of the ankle. What is the  most  anterior  of  the  structures  that  pass  through this tunnel?   A.  Flexor hallucis longus tendon   B.  Plantaris tendon   C.  Tibialis anterior tendon   D.  Tibialis posterior tendon   E.  Tibial nerve	D.  Tibialis posterior tendon
A  42-year-old  male  sign  painter  is  admitted  to the emergency department after falling to the sidewalk from his ladder. Radiologic examination reveals a fracture  of  the  proximal  femur.  Which  of  the  following arteries supplies the proximal part of the femur?   A.  Deep circumflex iliac   B.  Acetabular branch of obturator   C.  Lateral circumflex femoral   D.  A branch of profunda femoris   E.  Medial circumflex femoral	D.  A branch of profunda femoris
A  22-year-old  man  is  admitted  to  the  emergency department  after  falling  from  his  bicycle.  Radiologic examination  reveals  a  fracture  of  the  tibia  above  the ankle.  MRI  and  physical  examination  reveal  that  the tibial  nerve  is  severed  on  the  posterior  aspect  of the tibia. Which of the following signs will most likely be present during physical examination?   A.  Sensory loss of the dorsum of the foot   B.  Sensory loss on the sole of the foot   C.  Foot drop   D.  Paralysis of the extensor digitorum brevis   E.  Sensory loss of the entire foot	B.  Sensory loss on the sole of the foot
A  24-year-old  man  is  admitted  to  the  emergency department  after  a  car  collision.  Radiologic  examination reveals a fracture at the junction of the middle and lower thirds of the femur. An MRI examination provides evidence  that  the  popliteal  vessels  were  injured  when the  distal  fragment  of  the  fracture  was  pulled  posteriorly.  Which  of  the  following  muscles  is  most  likely  to displace the distal fracture fragment?   A.  Soleus   B.  Gastrocnemius   C.  Semitendinosus   D.  Gracilis   E.  Tibialis anterior	B.  Gastrocnemius
A 65-year-old man is admitted to the hospital after falling  from  his  roof  while  cleaning  leaves  and  pine needles from the gutters. Among other injuries suffered in his fall, radiologic examination reveals a fracture of the  talus  bone  in  one  foot.  Much  of  the  blood  supply of this bone can be lost in such an injury and can result in  osteonecrosis.  From  what  artery  does  this  bone receive its primary vascular supply?   A.  Medial plantar   B.  Lateral plantar   C.  Dorsalis pedis   D.  Anterior tibial   E.  Posterior tibial	E.  Posterior tibial
A  58-year-old  female  dancer  presented  to  the orthopedic  clinic  with  a  complaint  of  pain  during  her work because of bilateral bunions. She was referred to a podiatric surgeon who scheduled her for surgery. The protruding bony and soft tissues of the toe were excised, and a muscle was reflected from the lateral side of the proximal  phalanx,  together  with  a  sesamoid  bone, upon which the muscle also inserted. What muscle was this?   A.  Adductor hallucis   B.  Abductor hallucis   C.  First dorsal interosseous   D.  First lumbrical   E.  Quadratus plantae	A.  Adductor hallucis
A  34-year-old  male  long-distance  runner  complained  to  the  team  physician  of  swelling  and  pain  of his shin. Skin testing in a physical examination showed normal  cutaneous  sensation  of  the  leg.  Muscular strength tests showed marked weakness of dorsiflexion and impaired inversion of the foot. Which nerve serves the muscles involved in the painful swelling?   A.  Common fibular (peroneal)   B.  Deep fibular (peroneal)   C.  Sciatic   D.  Superficial fibular (peroneal)   E.  Tibial	B.  Deep fibular (peroneal)
A 7-year-old girl accidentally stepped on a sharp snail shell while walking to the beach. She was admitted to the hospital, where she received a tetanus shot, and  the  wound  was  cleaned  thoroughly  and  sutured. One week later, during a return visit to her physician, it is seen that she has great difficulty in flexing her big toe,  even  though  there  is  no  inflammation  present  in the  sole  of  the  foot.  Which  nerve  was  most  likely damaged by the piercing of the shell?   A.  Lateral plantar nerve   B.  Medial plantar nerve   C.  Sural nerve   D.  Superficial fibular (peroneal) nerve   E.  Deep fibular (peroneal) nerve	B.  Medial plantar nerve
A  49-year-old  man  is  admitted  to  the  emergency department with a cold and pale foot. Physical examination  reveals  that  the  patient  suffers  from  peripheral vascular  disease;  duplex  ultrasound  studies  indicate possible occlusion of his popliteal artery, and the pulse of the posterior tibial artery is absent. What is the most common location for palpation of the pulse of the posterior tibial artery?    A.  Lateral to the muscular belly of the abductor hallucis   B.  Posteroinferior to the medial femoral condyle    C.  Groove midway between the lateral malleolus and the calcaneus   D.  Groove midway between the medial malleolus and the calcaneus   E.  Medially, between the two heads of the gastrocnemius	D.  Groove midway between the medial malleolus and the calcaneus
Young parents were concerned that their 14-month-old daughter had not yet begun walking. Their pediatrician reassured them, saying that one of the muscles of the leg, the fibularis (peroneus) tertius, had to complete its  central  neurologic  development  before  the  child could lift the outer corner of the foot and walk without stumbling  over  her  toes.  What  is  the  most  common nerve supply of this muscle?   A.  Sural   B.  Lateral plantar   C.  Deep fibular (peroneal)   D.  Superficial fibular (peroneal)   E.  Tibial	C.  Deep fibular (peroneal)
A 22-year-old woman is admitted with high fever and  vaginal  discharge.  Physical  and  laboratory  examinations  reveal  gonorrheal  infection.  A  series  of  intramuscular  antibiotic  injections  are  ordered.  Into  which of  the  following  parts  of  the  gluteal  region  should  the antibiotic be injected to avoid nerve injury?   A.  Anterior and superior to a line between the posterior superior iliac spine and the greater trochanter   B.  In the middle of a line between the anterior superior iliac spine and the ischial tuberosity   C.  Inferolateral to a line between the posterior superior iliac spine and the greater trochanter   D.  Inferomedial to a line between the posterior superior iliac spine and the greater trochanter   E.  Halfway between the iliac tuberosity and the greater trochanter	A.  Anterior and superior to a line between the posterior superior iliac spine and the greater trochanter
A  45-year-old  intoxicated  man  was  struck  by  a tour bus while walking in the middle of the street. The man  was  admitted  to  the  emergency  department  and during  physical  examination  was  diagnosed  with “adductor  gait,”  in  which  an  individual  crosses  one limb in  front  of the other,  due to  powerful hip  adduction.  Which  of  the  following  nerves  was  most  likely involved in this condition?   A.  Tibial   B.  Obturator    C.  Inferior gluteal    D.  Superior gluteal    E.  Femoral	B.  Obturator
The  baby  was  quite  large,  and  the  pelvis  of  the mother-to-be  was  somewhat  narrow,  causing  her  considerable difficulty and pain during the delivery. At her specific request, it was decided to inject local anesthetic into  the  perineum.  The  genitofemoral  and  ilioinguinal nerves were infiltrated anteriorly, and a deep injection was  made  medial  to  the  ischial  tuberosity  to  anesthetize  the  pudendal  nerve,  which  supplies  much  of  the perineum in most cases. A few minutes later, it became very  obvious  to  those  in  attendance  that  the  injection had  not been  effective  enough  in  the  central and posterior  parts  of  the  perineum.  A  separate  injection  was therefore inserted lateral to the ischial tuberosity. What other nerve(s) can provide much of the sensory supply to the perineum in some individuals?   A.  Posterior femoral cutaneous   B.  Inferior cluneal nerves   C.  Iliohypogastric nerve   D.  Inferior gluteal nerve   E.  Middle cluneal nerves	A.  Posterior femoral cutaneous
A 55-year-old man is admitted to the hospital for an iliofemoral bypass. The operation is performed successfully  and  the  blood  flow  between  the  iliac  and femoral arteries is restored. During rehabilitation which of the following arteries should be palpated to monitor good circulation of the lower limb?   A.  Anterior tibial   B.  Deep fibular (peroneal)   C.  Deep plantar   D.  Dorsalis pedis   E.  Dorsal metatarsal	D.  Dorsalis pedis
A  55-year-old  woman  is  bitten  by  a  dog  in  the dorsum  of  the  foot  and  is  admitted  to  the  emergency department. The wound is cleaned thoroughly, during which it is seen that no tendons have been cut, but the dorsalis pedis artery and the accompanying nerve have been injured. Which of the following conditions would be expected during physical examination?   A.  Clubfoot   B.  Foot drop   C.  Inability to extend the big toe   D.  Numbness between the first and second toes   E.  Weakness in inversion of the foot	D.  Numbness between the first and second toes
A 31-year-old woman presents to the department of  surgery  with  a  complaint  of  facial  paralysis  (Bell’s palsy),  which  had  appeared  a  year  earlier  and  had resulted in paralysis of muscles of one side of her face. The chief of plastic surgery recommends a nerve graft, taking a cutaneous nerve from the lower limb to replace the defective facial nerve. The surgery is successful. Six months after the procedure, there is restoration of function of previously paralyzed facial muscles. There is an area  of  skin  on  the  back  of  the  leg  laterally  and  also on  the  lateral  side  of  the  foot  that  has  no  sensation. What nerve was used in the grafting procedure?   A.  Superficial fibular (peroneal)   B.  Tibial   C.  Common fibular (peroneal)   D.  Sural   E.  Saphenous	D.  Sural
A  10-year-old  girl  is  admitted  to  the  emergency department  after  falling  from  a  tree  in  which  she  was playing with her friends. Radiologic and physical exam- inations  reveal  Osgood-Schlatter  disease. Which  of  the  following  bony  structures  is  chiefly affected?   A.  Medial condyle of tibia   B.  Posterior intercondylar area   C.  Intercondylar eminence   D.  Tibial tuberosity   E.  Anterolateral tibial tubercle (Gerdy’s tubercle)	D.  Tibial tuberosity
An 81-year-old man is admitted to the emergency department with severe pain in his knees. The patient has a long history of osteoarthritis. Radiologic examination  reveals  degeneration  of  the  joints  of  his  lower limbs.  The  degeneration  is  more  severe  on  the  medial side of the knees, which causes his knees to be bowed outward when he stands upright. Which of the following terms best describes the condition of his knees?   A.  Genu varus   B.  Genu valgus   C.  Coxa varus   D.  Coxa valgus   E.  Hallux valgus	A.  Genu varus
The patellar reflex appears to be markedly reduced in a 33-year-old diabetic female patient, due to deficient vascular  supply  of  the  nerves  of  her  lower  limb.  The tendon  of  which  of  the  following  muscles  is  stretched during the patellar reflex?   A.  Quadriceps femoris   B.  Quadratus femoris   C.  Sartorius   D.  Pectineus   E.  Biceps femoris	A.  Quadriceps femoris
A  52-year-old  woman  is  admitted  to  the  emer- gency department after severely injuring her right lower limb when she fell from a trampoline. Radiologic examination  reveals  a  trimalleolar  fracture  of  the  ankle involving  the  lateral  malleolus,  medial  malleolus,  and the posterior process of the tibia. Which of the following bones will also most likely be affected?   A.  Navicular   B.  Calcaneus   C.  Cuneiform   D.  Cuboid   E.  Talus	E.  Talus
A 72-year-old man visits the outpatient clinic with a  complaint  of  severe  pain  when  walking.  Physical examination reveals the problems in his feet as shown in Fig. 5-5 (big toes in a sharp V motion). What is the most likely diagnosis?   A.  Coxa varus   B.  Coxa valgus   C.  Genu valgus   D.  Genu vara   E.  Hallux valgus	E.  Hallux valgus
A  63-year-old  woman  visits  the  outpatient orthopedic  clinic  with  the  complaint  of  pain  in  her foot  for  more  than  a  year.  Radiologic  and  physical examinations  give  evidence  of  constant  extension  at the  metatarsophalangeal  joints,  hyperflexion  at  the proximal interphalangeal joints, and extension of distal interphalangeal  joints.  Which  of  the  following  terms  is  most  accurate  to  describe  the  signs  of physical examination?   A.  Pes planus   B.  Pes cavus   C.  Hammertoes   D.  Claw toes   E.  Hallux valgus	C.  Hammertoes
A 58-year-old man is admitted to the hospital with pain in his lower limb for the past 2 months. Physical examination  reveals  point  tenderness  in  the  region  of his  greater  sciatic  foramen,  with  pain  radiating  down the posterior aspect of his thigh. An MRI examination reveals  that  the  patient  suffers  from  piriformis  entrap- ment syndrome. He is directed to treatment by a physical therapist for stretching and relaxation of the muscle. Entrapment of which of the following nerves can mimic piriformis entrapment syndrome?    A.  L4    B.  L5     C.  S1    D.  S2    E.  S3	C.  S1
A  22-year-old  woman  is  found  in  a  comatose condition,  having  lain  for  an  unknown  length  of  time on the tile floor of the courtyard. She is found in possession  of  cocaine.  The  patient  is  transported  to  the hospital  while  EMT  personnel  receive  instructions  for treatment of drug overdose. During the physical examination  the  patient’s  gluteal  region  shows  signs  of ischemia.  After  regaining  consciousness,  she  exhibits paralysis of knee flexion and dorsal and plantar flexion and  sensory  loss  in  the  limb.  What  is  the  most  likely diagnosis?   A.  Tibial nerve loss   B.  S1-2 nerve compression   C.  Gluteal crush injury   D.  Piriformis entrapment syndrome   E.  Femoral nerve entrapment	C.  Gluteal crush injury
A  75-year-old  man  is  admitted  to  the  emergency department with severe pain at his right hip and thigh. An  MRI  examination  reveals  avascular  necrosis  of  the femoral head (Fig. 5-7). Which of the following arteries is most likely injured, resulting in avascular necrosis?   A.  Deep circumflex iliac   B.  Acetabular branch of obturator   C.  Descending branch of lateral circumflex femoral   D.  First perforating branch of profunda femoris    E.  Ascending branch of medial circumflex femoral	E.  Ascending branch of medial circumflex femoral
A  27-year-old  woman  had  suffered  a  penetrating injury in the popliteal region by an object thrown from a  riding  lawnmower.  She  was  admitted  to  the  emergency  department  for  removal  of  the  foreign  object. After making a midline incision in the skin of the popliteal  fossa,  the  surgical  resident  observed  a  vein  of moderate  size  in  the  superficial  tissues.  What  vein would be expected at this location?   A.  Popliteal vein   B.  Perforating tributary to the deep femoral vein   C.  Great saphenous vein   D.  Lesser (short) saphenous vein   E.  Superior medial genicular vein	D.  Lesser (short) saphenous vein
A  58-year-old  diabetic  patient  is  admitted  to  the hospital  with  a  painful  foot.  Physical  examination reveals that the patient suffers from peripheral vascular disease.  There  is  no  detectable  dorsalis  pedis  arterial pulse, but the posterior tibial pulse is strong. Which of the following arteries will most likely provide adequate collateral  supply  from  the  plantar  surface  to  the  toes and dorsum of the foot?   A.  Anterior tibial   B.  Fibular (peroneal)   C.  Arcuate   D.  Medial plantar   E.  Lateral plantar	E.  Lateral plantar
A  32-year-old  man  is  admitted  to  the  emergency department  after  an  injury  to  his  foot  while  playing football  with  his  college  friends.  An  MRI  examination reveals  multiple  tendinous  tears  (Fig.  5-8).  Which  of the following bones is associated with the muscle tears?   A.  Navicular   B.  Cuboid   C.  Calcaneus   D.  Sustentaculum tali   E.  Talus	C.  Calcaneus
An  18-year-old  professional  tennis  player  fell when she leaped for an overhead shot and landed with her foot inverted. Radiologic examination in the hospital revealed an avulsion fracture of the tuberosity of the fifth  metatarsal.  Part  of  the  tuberosity  is  pulled  off, producing  pain  and  edema.  Which  of  the  following muscles is pulling on the fractured fragment?   A.  Fibularis (peroneus) longus   B.  Tibialis posterior   C.  Fibularis (peroneus) brevis   D.  Extensor digitorum brevis   E.  Adductor hallucis	C.  Fibularis (peroneus) brevis
A  58-year-old  female  employee  of  a  housecleaning  business  visits  the  outpatient  clinic  with  a  complaint of a constant burning pain in her knees. Clinical examinations  reveal  a  “housemaid’s  knee”  condition (Fig.  5-9).  Which  of  the  following  structures  is  most likely affected?   A.  Prepatellar bursa   B.  Infrapatellar bursa   C.  Posterior cruciate ligament   D.  Patellar retinacula   E.  Lateral meniscus	A.  Prepatellar bursa
A  42-year-old  mother  of  three  children  visits  the outpatient  clinic  complaining  that  her  youngest  son cannot walk yet even though he is 4 years old. Radiologic and physical examinations reveal an unstable hip joint.  Which  of  the  following  ligaments  is  responsible for stabilization of the hip joint in childhood?   A.  Iliofemoral   B.  Pubofemoral   C.  Ischiofemoral   D.  Ligament of the head of the femur   E.  Transverse acetabular ligament	D.  Ligament of the head of the femur
A 45-year-old is admitted to the hospital after his left  leg  impacted  a  fence  post  when  he  was  thrown from  a  powerful  four-wheel  all-terrain  vehicle.  Radiologic examination reveals posterior displacement of the tibia upon the femur. Which of the following structures was most likely injured?   A.  Anterior cruciate ligament   B.  Posterior cruciate ligament   C.  Lateral collateral ligament   D.  Lateral meniscus ligament   E.  Patellar ligament	B.  Posterior cruciate ligament
A  55-year-old  man  visits  the  outpatient  clinic complaining that he cannot walk more than 5 minutes without feeling severe pain in his feet. An image of the feet  of  this  patient  is  shown  in  Fig.  5-10 (feet placed in a V position).  What  is  the most common cause of this condition?   A.  Collapse of medial longitudinal arch, with eversion and abduction of the forefoot   B.  Exaggerated height of the medial longitudinal arch of the foot   C.  Collapse of long plantar ligament     D.  Collapse of deltoid ligament    E.  Collapse of plantar calcaneonavicular ligament	A.  Collapse of medial longitudinal arch, with eversion and abduction of the forefoot
A  55-year-old  cowboy  is  admitted  to  the  emergency  department  after  he  was  knocked  from  his  feet by a young longhorn steer. MRI examination reveals a large hematoma in the knee joint. Physical examination reveals  that  the  patient  suffers  from  the  “unhappy triad” (of O’Donoghue). Which of the following structures are involved in such an injury?   A.  Medial collateral ligament, medial meniscus, and anterior cruciate ligament   B.  Lateral collateral ligament, lateral meniscus, and posterior cruciate ligament   C.  Medial collateral ligament, lateral meniscus, and anterior cruciate ligament   D.  Lateral collateral ligament, medial meniscus, and anterior cruciate ligament   E.  Medial collateral ligament, medial meniscus, and posterior cruciate ligament	A.  Medial collateral ligament, medial meniscus, and anterior cruciate ligament
A  32-year-old  man  is  admitted  to  the  emergency department  after  a  car  collision.  Radiologic  examination  reveals  a  distal  fracture  of  the  femur.  The  patient is in severe pain, and a femoral nerve block is administered.  What  landmark  is  accurate  for  localizing  the nerve for injection of anesthetics?   A.  1.5 cm superolateral to the pubic tubercle   B.  1.5 cm medial to the anterior superior iliac spine   C.  1.5 cm lateral to the femoral pulse    D.  1.5 cm medial to the femoral pulse    E.  Midway between the anterior superior iliac spine and pubic symphysis	C.  1.5 cm lateral to the femoral pulse
A  39-year-old  woman  is  admitted  to  the  emer- gency department with a painful foot. Radiologic examination reveals a Morton’s neuroma. What is the most typical location of this neuroma?   A.  Between the third and fourth metatarsophalangeal joints    B.  Between the second and third metatarsophalangeal joints   C.  Between the first and second metatarsophalangeal joints   D.  Between the fourth and fifth metatarsophalangeal joints   E.  In the region of the second, third, and fourth metatarsophalangeal joints	A.  Between the third and fourth metatarsophalangeal joints
A 34-year-old male distance runner visits the out-patient clinic with a complaint of pain he has suffered in his foot for the past week. The clinical examination indicates  that  the  patient  has  an  inflammation  of  the tough  band  of  tissue  stretching  from  the  calcaneus  to the ball of the foot. Which of the following conditions is most characteristic of these symptoms?   A.  Morton’s neuroma   B.  Ankle eversion sprain   C.  Tarsal tunnel syndrome   D.  Plantar fasciitis   E.  Inversion sprain of the ankle	D.  Plantar fasciitis
A 5-month-old baby boy is admitted to the pediatric  orthopedic  clinic.  During  physical  examination  it is noted that the baby has inversion and adduction of the forefoot relative to the hindfoot and plantar flexion. Which of the following terms is diagnostic for the signs observed on physical examination?   A.  Coxa vara   B.  Talipes equinovarus   C.  Hallux valgus   D.  Hallux varus   E.  Plantar fasciitis	B.  Talipes equinovarus
A  71-year-old  man  is  admitted  to  the  orthopedic clinic with difficulties walking. The patient has a past history  of  polio.  Physical  and  radiologic  examinations reveal extension at the metatarsophalangeal joints with flexion of both the proximal and distal interphalangeal joints.  Which  of  the  following  descriptions  is  most appropriate for this patient’s condition?   A.  Hallux valgus   B.  Pes planus   C.  Hammertoes   D.  Claw toes   E.  Pes cavus	D.  Claw toes
A  62-year-old  man  is  admitted  to  the  emergency department.  Radiologic  examination  and  the  available data  indicate  the  likelihood  of  a  transient  ischemic attack.  During  physical  examination  the  ankle  jerk reflex is absent. Which of the following nerves is most likely responsible for the reflex arc?   A.  Common fibular (peroneal)   B.  Superficial fibular (peroneal)   C.  Deep fibular (peroneal)   D.  Tibial   E.  Superficial and deep fibular (peroneal)	D.  Tibial
Following the insertion of a prosthetic hip joint in a 72-year-old man, it was observed that the patient had greatly  diminished  sensation  in  the  region  of  distribution  of  the  posterior  femoral  cutaneous  nerve.  Which of the following is characteristic of this nerve?    A.  Cutaneous supply of the superior aspect of the gluteal region   B.  Arises from sacral spinal nerve levels S1, S2, S3   C.  Motor innervation of the obturator internus and gemelli muscles   D.  Injury results in meralgia paresthetica         E.  Provides origin of the sural nerve	B.  Arises from sacral spinal nerve levels S1, S2, S3
A  34-year-old  woman  has  a  direct  blow  to  the patella by the dashboard of the vehicle during an auto-mobile crash. The woman is admitted to the emergency department  and  radiologic  examination  reveals  patellofemoral  syndrome.  This  type  of  syndrome  is  characterized  by  lateral  dislocation  of  the  patella.  Which  of the following muscles requires strengthening by physical  rehabilitation  to  prevent  future  dislocation  of  the patella?   A.  Vastus lateralis   B.  Vastus medialis   C.  Vastus intermedius   D.  Rectus femoris   E.  Patellar ligament	B.  Vastus medialis
A 34-year-old man visits the outpatient clinic for an annual checkup. A radiographic examination of his knees  is  shown  in  Fig.  5-11.  Physical  examination reveals no pathology or pain to his knees. The patient has no past history of any knee problems. What is the most likely diagnosis?   A.  Enlarged prepatellar bursa   B.  Osgood-Schlatter disease   C.  Normal intercondylar eminence   D.  Bipartite patella   E.  Injury to lateral meniscus	D.  Bipartite patella
A 48-year-old woman is admitted to the hospital with severe abdominal pain. Several imaging methods reveal that the patient suffers from intestinal ischemia. An abdominopelvic catheterization is ordered for antegrade  angiography.  A  femoral  puncture  is  performed. What is the landmark for femoral artery puncture?   A.  Halfway between anterior superior iliac spine and pubic symphysis   B.  4.5 cm lateral to the pubic tubercle    C.  Midpoint of the inguinal skin crease    D.  Medial aspect of femoral head    E.  Lateral to the fossa ovalis	D.  Medial aspect of femoral head
A  23-year-old  man  is  admitted  to  the  emergency department  after  injuring  his  knee  while  playing  football.  During  physical  examination  there  is  pain  and swelling of the knee, in addition to locking of the knee in  full  extension.  Radiologic  examination  reveals  a bucket  handle  meniscal  tear  (Fig.  5-12).  Which  of  the following ligaments is most likely injured?   A.  Posterior cruciate   B.  Medial collateral   C.  Lateral collateral   D.  Anterior cruciate   E.  Coronary	D.  Anterior cruciate
A  27-year-old  male  triathlon  competitor  com- plained  that  he  frequently  experienced  deep  pains  in one calf that almost caused him to drop out of a regional track-and-field event. Doppler ultrasound studies indi- cated,  and  surgical  exposure  confirmed,  the  existence of an accessory portion of the medial head of the gastrocnemius  that  was  constricting  the  popliteal  artery. Above the medial head of the gastrocnemius, the superior medial border of the popliteal fossa could be seen. Which of the following structures forms this border?   A.  Tendon of biceps femoris    B.  Tendons of semitendinosus and semimembranosus   C.  Tendon of plantaris    D.  Adductor hiatus    E.  Popliteus	B.  Tendons of semitendinosus and semimembranosus
The  neurosurgeon  had  removed  a  portion  of  the dense  tissue  (dura  mater)  covering  the  brain  of  the patient when she removed the tumor that had invaded the  skull.  To  replace  this  important  tissue  covering  of the  brain,  she  took  a  band  of  the  aponeurotic  tissue of  the  lateral  aspect  of  the  thigh,  covering  the  vastus lateralis muscle. What muscle, supplied by the inferior gluteal nerve, inserts into this band of dense tissue as part of its insertion?   A.  Gluteus medius   B.  Gluteus minimus   C.  Gluteus maximus   D.  Tensor fasciae latae   E.  Rectus femoris	C.  Gluteus maximus
In the radiographs of the knee of a male 28-year-old  basketball  player,  who  had  apparently  suffered  a tear  in  a  medial  ligament  of  the  knee,  the  tubercle  on the superior aspect of the medial femoral condyle could be  seen  more  clearly  than  in  most  individuals.  What muscle attaches to this tubercle?   A.  Semimembranosus   B.  Gracilis   C.  Popliteus    D.  Adductor magnus    E.  Vastus medialis	D.  Adductor magnus
In  preparing  to  isolate  the  proximal  portion  of the  femoral  artery,  the  vascular  surgeon  gently  separated it from surrounding tissues. Posterior to the femoral sheath, what muscle forms the lateral portion of the floor of the femoral triangle?   A.  Adductor longus   B.  Iliopsoas   C.  Sartorius   D.  Pectineus   E.  Rectus femoris	B.  Iliopsoas
A  37-year-old  woman  had  been  suffering  for months  from  piriformis  entrapment  syndrome,  which was not relieved by physical therapy. Part of the sciatic nerve  passed  through  the  piriformis,  and  a  decision was  made  for  surgical  resection  of  the  muscle.  When the  area  of  entrapment  was  identified  and  cleared,  a tendon  could  be  seen  emerging  through  the  lesser sciatic foramen, at first hidden by two smaller muscles and several nerves and vessels destined for the region of the perineum. The tendons of which of the following muscles pass through this opening?   A.  Obturator internus   B.  Obturator externus   C.  Quadratus femoris   D.  Gluteus minimus   E.  Gluteus medius	A.  Obturator internus
A  67-year-old  woman  has  been  suffering  from osteoporosis for the past year. During her annual check-up,  radiologic  examination  reveals  an  angle  of  160 degrees  made  by  the  axis  of  the  femoral  neck  to  the axis of the femoral shaft. Which of the following conditions is associated with these examination findings?   A.  Coxa vara   B.  Coxa valga   C.  Genu valgum   D.  Genu varum   E.  Hallux valgus	B.  Coxa valga
A  34-year-old  male  runner  visits  the  outpatient clinic complaining of pain in his foot for the past week. Physical examination reveals inflammation of the tough band of tissue stretching from the calcaneus to the ball of the foot. Which of the following conditions is characteristic of these symptoms?   A.  Pott’s fracture   B.  Dupuytren fracture    C.  Tarsal tunnel    D.  Plantar fasciitis    E.  Rupture of spring ligament	D.  Plantar fasciitis
A  50-year-old  man  is  admitted  to  the  emergency department  after  a  car  crash.  An  MRI  examination reveals  an  injured  anterior  cruciate  ligament.  Physical examination  reveals  a  positive  drawer  sign.  Which  of the  following  signs  is  expected  to  be  present  during physical examination?   A.  The tibia can be slightly displaced anteriorly   B.  The tibia can be slightly displaced posteriorly   C.  The fibula can be slightly displaced posteriorly   D.  The fibula can be slightly displaced anteriorly    E.  The tibia and fibula can be slightly displaced anteriorly	A.  The tibia can be slightly displaced anteriorly
A  23-year-old  male  basketball  player  injured  his foot  during  training  and  is  admitted  to  the  emergency department. An MRI examination reveals a hematoma around  the  medial  malleolus.  Upon  physical  examination  the  patient  shows  excessive  eversion  of  his  foot. Which  of  the  following  ligaments  most  likely  has  a tear?   A.  Plantar calcaneonavicular (spring)   B.  Calcaneofibular   C.  Long plantar   D.  Short plantar   E.  Deltoid	E.  Deltoid
A  5-year-old  boy  is  admitted  to  the  emergency department  after  a  car  collision.  Radiologic  examination reveals a fracture of the head of the femur. An MRI examination  reveals  a  large  hematoma.  Which  of  the following arteries is most likely injured?   A.  Deep circumflex iliac   B.  Acetabular branch of obturator   C.  Descending branch of lateral circumflex femoral   D.  Medial circumflex femoral   E.  Radicular branches of circumflex artery	B.  Acetabular branch of obturator
A  72-year-old  woman  is  admitted  to  the  emergency  department  after  an  episode  of  stroke.  During neurologic examination the patient shows no response to  the  ankle  reflex  test.  Which  of  the  following  nerve roots is responsible for this reflex?   A.  L2   B.  L3   C.  L4    D.  L5    E.  S1	E.  S1
A  20-year-old  man  visits  the  family  physician complaining  of  difficulty  to  flex  and  medially  rotate his  thigh  while  running  and  climbing.  Which  of  the following  muscles  is  most  likely  damaged  in  this individual?   A.  Rectus femoris   B.  Tensor fasciae latae   C.  Vastus intermedius   D.  Semimembranosus   E.  Sartorius	B.  Tensor fasciae latae
A  49-year-old  man  is  admitted  to  the  emergency department with a cold and pale foot. Physical examination  reveals  that  the  patient  suffers  from  peripheral vascular  disease;  his  popliteal  artery  is  occluded  and no pulse is felt upon palpation. What is the landmark to feel the pulse of the femoral artery?   A.  Adductor canal   B. Femoral triangle   C.  Popliteal fossa   D.  Inguinal canal   E.  Pubic symphysis	B. Femoral triangle
A  49-year-old  man  is  admitted  to  the  emergency department complaining that he has difficulties walking. Physical  examination  reveals  that  the  patient  suffers from peripheral vascular disease. An ultrasound examination reveals an occlusion of his femoral artery at the proximal  portion  of  the  adductor  canal.  Which  of  the following  arteries  will  most  likely  provide  collateral circulation to the thigh?   A.  Descending branch of the lateral circumflex femoral   B.  Descending genicular    C.  Medial circumflex femoral    D.  First perforating branch of deep femoral     E.  Obturator artery	A.  Descending branch of the lateral circumflex femoral
A 34-year-old man is lifting heavy weights while doing  squats.  Unfortunately,  while  making  a  maximal effort,  he  drops  the  weight  and  immediately  grabs  at his upper thigh, writhing in pain. The man is admitted to  the  emergency  department  and  during  physical examination is diagnosed with a femoral hernia. What reference structure would be found immediately lateral to the herniated structures?   A.  Femoral vein   B.  Femoral artery    C.  Pectineus muscle    D.  Femoral nerve    E.  Adductor longus muscle	A.  Femoral vein
A  25-year-old  man,  an  intravenous  drug  abuser, had been injecting himself with temazepam (a powerful intermediate acting drug in the same group as diazepam  (Valium)  and  heroin  for  5  years,  leaving  much residual scar tissue over points of vascular access. The patient is admitted to the emergency department for a detoxification  program  requiring  an  intravenous  infu- sion. The femoral veins in his groin are the only accessible  and  patent  veins  for  intravenous  use.  Which  of the following landmarks is the most reliable to identify the femoral veins?   A.  The femoral vein lies medial to the femoral artery.   B.  The femoral vein lies within the femoral canal.   C.  The femoral vein lies lateral to the femoral artery.   D.  The femoral vein lies directly medial to the femoral nerve.   E.  The femoral vein lies lateral to the femoral nerve.	A.  The femoral vein lies medial to the femoral artery.
A 42-year-old man is bitten on his posterior thigh by a dog. The superficial wound is sutured in the emergency  department.  Four  days  later  the  patient  returns to  the  hospital  with  high  fever  and  swollen  lymph nodes. Which group of nodes first receives lymph from the infected wound?   A.  External iliac   B.  Vertical group of superficial inguinal   C.  Deep inguinal   D.  Horizontal group of superficial inguinal   E.  Internal iliac	B.  Vertical group of superficial inguinal
During  a  battle,  a  19-year-old  soldier  is  shot  in the lateral aspect of the right foot by a bullet that ricocheted  off  a  building.  The  soldier  is  taken  to  a  field hospital. A radiograph of the foot reveals that the base of  the  fifth  metatarsal  was  completely  obliterated. Which of the following muscles is most likely affected by this injury?   A.  Tibialis anterior   B.  Fibularis (peroneus) longus   C.  Gastrocnemius   D.  Fibularis (peroneus) brevis   E.  Extensor hallucis longus	D.  Fibularis (peroneus) brevis
A  29-year-old  woman  is  involved  in  a  car  crash and is taken to the emergency department. Radiographs reveal  a  fracture  of  her  pelvis.  During  healing  of  the pelvic fracture, a nerve becomes entrapped in the bone callus. Musculoskeletal examination reveals an inability to  adduct  the  thigh.  Which  of  the  following  nerves  is most likely affected?   A.  Obturator   B.  Femoral   C.  Inferior gluteal   D.  Superior gluteal   E.  Tibial	A.  Obturator
A 29-year-old man is brought to the physician for removal of a cast from his left leg. He had sustained a fracture of the left lower extremity 6 weeks prior which was  immobilized  in  a  cast  that  extended  from  just below the knee to the foot. At the time of injury, there was  severe  pain  but  normal  strength  in  the  extremity. When  the  cast  was  removed,  physical  examination showed  a  pronounced  left  foot  drop  with  paresthesia and  sensory  loss  over  the  dorsum  of  the  left  foot  and lateral  leg.  Injury  to  which  nerve  is  the  most  likely cause?   A.  Common fibular (peroneal)   B.  Superficial fibular (peroneal)   C.  Deep fibular (peroneal)   D.  Sciatic   E.  Tibial	A.  Common fibular (peroneal)
A 12-year-old boy is brought to the physician by his  father  because  of  redness  and  swelling  of  his  left foot for 24 hours. Three days earlier he had scraped his foot while wading in a drainage ditch. Examination of the  foot  shows  a  purulent  abrasion  with  edema,  erythema, and tenderness on the lateral side. Infection will most  likely  spread  from  the  lateral  side  of  the  foot  to the regional lymph nodes in which area?   A.  Lateral surface of the thigh   B.  Medial malleolus, posteriorly   C.  Popliteal fossa   D.  Sole of the foot   E.  Superficial inguinal area	C.  Popliteal fossa
A  22-year-old  soccer  player  collides  with  one  of her  teammates.  During  examination  on  the  field,  the posterior  drawer  test  was  performed  and  the  tibia moved  backward  in  relation  to  her  femur.  Injury  to which structure is confirmed by performing this test?   A.  Anterior cruciate ligament   B.  Lateral collateral ligament    C.  Medial collateral ligament    D.  Medial meniscus    E.  Posterior cruciate ligament	E.  Posterior cruciate ligament
A  16-year-old  boy  presents  to  the  emergency department with a fracture of the first and second toes of his right foot. He received an anesthetic injection in the first web space of his foot, to permit easy manipulation  and  correction.  Which  nerve  was  blocked  by  the anesthesia?   A.  Saphenous   B.  Cutaneous branch of deep fibular (peroneal)   C.  Cutaneous branch of superficial fibular (peroneal)   D.  Sural     E.  Common fibular (peroneal)	B.  Cutaneous branch of deep fibular (peroneal)
During an interview, a 30-year-old man who is a psychiatric  patient  suddenly  becomes  aggressive.  In order to calm him down, the patient is given an intramuscular injection in the upper lateral quadrant of the buttock. The injection is given at this specific location to prevent damage to which of the following nerves?   A.  Lateral femoral cutaneous   B.  Sciatic   C.  Superior gluteal   D.  Obturator   E.  Inferior gluteal	B.  Sciatic
A  lateral  blow  to  the  knee  during  a  tackle  in  a football game injures a 24-year-old woman. Field examination reveals an “anterior drawer sign.” An MRI demonstrates  injury  to  several  structures  of  the  knee, including her medial meniscus. Which structure might also have been injured by the tackle?   A.  Medial collateral ligament   B.  Lateral collateral ligament   C.  Lateral meniscus   D.  Posterior cruciate ligament   E.  Tendon of the semitendinosus	A.  Medial collateral ligament
A  58-year-old  woman  presents  to  the  outpatient surgery  clinic  for  removal  of  varicose  veins  on  the medial aspect of her foot. The operation was successful however, one month later she reports loss of sensation over  the  medial  aspect  of  her  leg  and  foot.  Which  of the following nerves was most likely injured during the procedure?   A.  Saphenous   B.  Obturator    C.  Lateral femoral cutaneous    D.  Tibial    E.  Femoral	A.  Saphenous
A  16-year-old  teenage  girl  suffered  an  inversion sprain of her ankle during dance class. Physical examination  in  the  clinic  most  likely  reveals  severe  tenderness over which ligament?   A.  Calcaneonavicular (spring)   B.  Calcaneofibular   C.  Long plantar   D.  Short plantar   E.  Deltoid	B.  Calcaneofibular
A  58-year-old  man  visited  his  physician  for  his annual check-up. Physical examination reveals a hyper reflexive patellar reflex. Which muscle(s) contribute(s) to the tendon that is struck when testing this reflex?   A.  Quadriceps femoris   B.  Quadratus femoris   C.  Sartorius   D.  Pectineus   E.  Biceps femoris	A.  Quadriceps femoris
A  37-year-old  unconscious  man  is  rushed  to  the emergency  department  after  being  retrieved  from  a motor vehicle crash. On physical examination bruising and obvious deformity is seen over his left knee joint. Radiological  studies  showed  a  posteriorly  dislocated supracondylar fracture with severe compression of the popliteal artery. Which of the following arteries would ensure adequate blood supply to the leg and foot in this patient?   A.  Medial femoral circumflex   B.  Lateral femoral circumflex   C.  Anterior tibial artery   D.  Posterior tibial artery   E.  Fibular (peroneal) artery	B.  Lateral femoral circumflex
After a revascularization procedure involving the common  iliac  artery,  a  68-year-old  man  has  difficulty walking.  Nerve  conduction  studies  reveal  decreased activity  in  the  nerve  that  innervates  the  adductors  of the thigh. Which nerve is this?   A.  Femoral   B.  Obturator   C.  Common fibular (peroneal)   D.  Tibial   E.  Sciatic	B.  Obturator
A 23-year-old woman was taken to the emergency department after being involved in a head-on collision with a truck. On physical examination a hematoma was seen in the medial thigh. A CT scan revealed a fracture of  the  femur  with  a  ruptured  femoral  artery.  She  was taken to the operating room for repair of the damaged structures.  Two  days  postoperatively  during  physical examination  the  patient  has  loss  of  sensation  to  the anterior  medial  thigh  and  medial  side  of  her  leg  and foot.  Branches  of  which  of  the  following  nerves  were most likely injured in the repair of the fracture?   A.  Femoral   B.  Saphenous   C.  Obturator   D.  Tibial   E.  Fibular (peroneal)	A.  Femoral
A  27-year-old  man  has  had  increasing  difficulty walking  and  complained  of  an  area  of  numbness  on the dorsum of his right foot. Examination reveals a hard mass  at  the  anterolateral  aspect  of  his  right  leg  just below  the  knee.  Imaging  studies  reveal  a  large  bone tumor between the fibula and tibia that is compressing a  nerve,  accounting  for  his  neurological  symptoms. Which of the following is the most likely description of abnormalities on neurological examination?   A.  Decreased/absent knee jerk reflex and decreased sensation on the medial aspect of the leg   B.  Weakness of flexion at the knee and decreased sensation of the plantar aspect of the foot   C.  Weakness of eversion at the ankle and decreased sensation between the first and second toes   D.  Weakness of inversion, dorsiflexion at the ankle, and decreased sensation between the first and second toes   E.  Weakness of plantar flexion at the ankle, weakness of toe flexion, decreased sensation of the plantar aspect of the foot	D.  Weakness of inversion, dorsiflexion at the ankle, and decreased sensation between the first and second toes
A 60-year-old retired male marathon runner complains  to  his  primary  care  physician  that  during  his daily  morning  jog  he  experiences  bouts  of  numbness and  tingling  on  the  medial  aspect  of  his  heel.  Upon further  examination  the  doctor  discovers  the  patient has trouble tiptoeing and shows a positive Tinel’s sign. Which of the following conditions is most characteristic of these symptoms?   A.  Plantar fasciitis   B.  Ankle inversion sprain    C.  Morton’s neuroma    D.  Lateral ligament    E.  Tarsal tunnel syndrome	E.  Tarsal tunnel syndrome
A 50-year-old diabetic man presents for a routine wellness  checkup.  During  physical  examination  it  is noted  that  he  has  paraesthesia  in  a  classic  glove  and stocking distribution. The physician decides on a complete  peripheral  vascular  system  examination,  which includes  palpating  the  pulse  of  the  dorsalis  pedis. Where can the dorsalis pedis pulse be palpated?   A.  Between the tendons of extensor hallucis and extensor digitorum longus on the dorsum of the foot   B.  Superior to flexor hallucis longus just distal to the tarsal tunnel   C.  Inferolateral to the pubic symphysis and medial to the deep dorsal vein of the penis   D.  2 cm anterior to the medial malleolus    E.  2 cm posterior to the medial malleolu	A.  Between the tendons of extensor hallucis and extensor digitorum longus on the dorsum of the foot
A 43-year-old victim of a drunk driving car crash is undergoing reconstructive arm surgery. The surgeon performs an autograft using a weak adductor of the leg located  superficially  on  the  medial  side  of  the  thigh. Which muscle is most likely being harvested to perform this reconstruction?   A.  Gracilis   B.  Sartorius   C.  Rectus femoris   D.  Vastus lateralis   E.  Vastus medialis	A.  Gracilis
A  39-year-old  woman  who  is  a  school  teacher unwittingly  sits  on  a  thumbtack  a  student  placed  on her  chair.  Her  left  buttock  becomes  painful  and inflamed. Which group of nodes will first receive lymph from the infected wound?   A.  Superficial horizontal group   B.  Superficial vertical group   C.  Superior and inferior gluteal nodes   D.  External iliac   E.  Deep inguinal	A.  Superficial horizontal group
During  a  100-meter  sprint  a  25-year-old  male Olympic athlete suddenly pulls up in discomfort and is seen to be clutching the back of his left thigh in agony. Upon further examination the athlete describes the pain as a “tearing” sensation and is unable to flex his knee. Based  on  these  symptoms  which  of  the  following actions are affected due to this injury?    A.  Flexion of the hip and extension of the knee    B.  Extension of the hip and dorsiflexion    C.  Medial rotation of the hip    D.  Lateral rotation of the hip    E.  Hip extension and knee flexion	E.  Hip extension and knee flexion
During a gymnastic session, a 24-year-old woman suddenly  developed  pain  and  swelling  on  the  right buttock.  This  happened  following  a  forceful  thigh movement. There is severe weakness of right hip extension  and  knee  flexion.  Adduction  of  the  thigh  is  also slightly weak. An avulsion fracture of the ischial tuberosity is found on a radiograph. Which of the following group  of  muscles  has  most  likely  involved  in  this process?   A.  Adductor brevis, adductor longus, adductor magnus, pectineus, and gracilis    B.  Biceps femoris, semimembranosus, semitendinosus, and adductor magnus   C.  Iliacus and psoas major    D.  Gluteus medius and gluteus minimus     E.  Gluteus maximus and adductor magnus     F.  Iliacus, psoas major, rectus femoris and sartorius	B.  Biceps femoris, semimembranosus, semitendinosus, and adductor magnus
A 6-year-old boy with a family history of muscular  disease  leading  to  wheelchair  dependency  in  his maternal  uncles  presents  with  difficulty  in  standing from  the  seated  position.  He  bends  forward,  uses  his hands  to  help  him  push  up  from  the  floor,  and  then straightens his knees to stand. Which of the following muscles is most likely involved by this disease process?   A.  Tibialis posterior and gastrocnemius   B.  Quadratus femoris   C.  Gluteus medius and gluteus minimus   D.  Gluteus maximus   E.  Hamstrings   F.  Iliopsoas	D.  Gluteus maximus
A 43-year-old woman receives deep intramuscular injections for the past week for treatment of a sexually transmitted  disease.  She  complains  to  her  doctor  that she has difficulty walking. During physical examination her right hip drops every time she raises her right foot. Which  of  the  following  injection  locations  will  most likely correspond with the clinical presentation of this patient?   A.  Superomedial quadrant of the buttock   B.  Superolateral quadrant of the buttock   C.  Inferomedial quadrant of the buttock    D.  Inferolateral quadrant of the buttock    E.  Posterior thigh	A.  Superomedial quadrant of the buttock
A 22-year-old male professional football player is admitted to the emergency department with acute right knee pain after sustaining a kick injury to an extended leg. A radiograph and a subsequent MRI revealed that the  trauma  caused  anterior  displacement  of  the  tibia with respect to her femur. Which of the following ligaments was most likely injured?   A.  Fibular (lateral) collateral   B.  Tibial (medial) collateral   C.  Patellar   D.  Anterior cruciate   E.  Posterior cruciate    F.  Oblique popliteal	D.  Anterior cruciate
A  51-year-old  immigrant  with  tuberculosis  is found  to  have  large  flocculent  masses  over  the  lateral lumbar  spine.  There  is  a  similar  mass  located  in  the ipsilateral groin. Physical examination reveals increased tenderness just medial to the ipsilateral anterior superior  iliac  spine  on  palpation.  This  pattern  of  involvement  most  likely  suggests  an  abscess  tracking  along which of the following muscles?   A.  Piriformis   B.  Psoas major   C.  Adductor longus   D.  Gluteus maximus   E.  Obturator internus	B.  Psoas major
A  23-year-old  man  is  taken  to  the  emergency department because of anorexia, nausea, vomiting, and severe abdominal pain in the right lower quadrant. On examination, he has tenderness in the right lower quadrant  with  rebound  tenderness.  The  physician  suspects appendicitis.  To  confirm  this  diagnosis,  the  physician attempts  to  straighten  the  patient’s  flexed  thigh.  This causes  the  patient  to  wince  with  pain.  Which  of  the following muscles most likely caused this symptom?   A.  Adductor magnus   B.  Psoas major   C.  Biceps femoris   D.  Obturator internus   E.  Gluteus maximus	B.  Psoas major
A  60-year-old  man  presents  with  pain  on  the medial aspect of his thigh. During physical examination he describes the pain to be constant, nonradiating and he  also  complains  of  numbness  on  the  medial  aspect of his leg and medial plantar arch. The nerve involved in this patient’s numbness is closely associated with a structure with which of the following characteristics?   A.  Empties into the popliteal vein   B.  In its ascent in the medial aspect of the leg, it travels posterior to the medial condyle of the femur   C.  In its ascent in the medial aspect of the leg, it travels anterior to the medial condyle of the femur   D.  Arches posterior to the medial malleolus     E.  Is associated with nodes that drain to the horizontal group of inguinal nodes	B.  In its ascent in the medial aspect of the leg, it travels posterior to the medial condyle of the femur
A 56-year-old diabetic man complains of repeated injury and ulcers to his right big toe. He also complains that he finds it difficult maintaining his shoes because the  tips  of  the  shoes  around  the  toe  area  easily  wear down. He also complains that for a while now, his first two toes “feel funny.” He used to enjoy playing soccer on weekends but has found it difficult to be involved. Which of the following nerves is most likely affected?   A.  Superior gluteal nerve injury   B.  Inferior gluteal nerve injury   C.  Deep fibular (peroneal) nerve injury   D.  Superficial fibular (peroneal) nerve injury   E.  Common fibular (peroneal) nerve injury	C.  Deep fibular (peroneal) nerve injury
A 30-year-old man who is a bodybuilder presents to  the  physician’s  office  complaining  of  pain  and  tingling  sensation  radiating  down  the  inside  of  his  thigh that was  exacerbated  upon  thigh  movement.  A hernia through  which  opening  would  most  likely  cause  this presentation?   A.  Femoral ring   B.  Superficial inguinal ring   C.  Deep inguinal ring   D.  Fossa ovalis   E.  Obturator canal	E.  Obturator canal
After suffering a deep stab wound to her posterior thigh, a 22-year-old woman presents to the emergency department. The wound is closed but the patient develops  a  subsequent  wound  infection.  Which  group  of lymph  nodes  first  receives  drainage  from  this  deep wound area, and would most likely be enlarged in this patient?   A.  External iliac   B.  Superficial inguinal   C.  Deep inguinal   D.  Common iliac   E.  Internal iliac	C.  Deep inguinal
A 29-year-old construction worker falls onto some rusty  wire  mesh  and  suffers  a  deep  laceration  to  his right buttock. When the ambulance arrives to transport him to the emergency department and it is noted that he has difficulty stepping up into the ambulance with his right leg. Which nerve has probably been damaged?   A.  Superior gluteal   B.  Tibial   C.  Common fibular (peroneal)   D.  Inferior gluteal   E.  Nerve to piriformis	D.  Inferior gluteal
A  69-year-old  woman,  who  fell  down  the  stairs, presents  to  the  emergency  department.  Radiologic imaging reveals a fracture of the talocrural (tibiotalar) joint. Which movements take place at this joint?   A.  Plantar flexion and dorsiflexion   B.  Inversion and eversion   C.  Plantar flexion, dorsiflexion, inversion, and eversion   D.  Plantar flexion and inversion    E.  Dorsiflexion and eversion	A.  Plantar flexion and dorsiflexion
After being struck from behind by a motor vehicle, a 55-year-old man presents to the hospital with a swelling of his right knee. Imaging reveals a large hematoma of  the  popliteal  artery  compressing  his  tibial  nerve. Upon neurologic examination which movement would likely be diminished in strength?   A.  Dorsiflexion of the foot   B.  Flexion of the thigh   C.  Extension of the digits   D.  Extension of the leg   E.  Plantar flexion of the foot	E.  Plantar flexion of the foot
A  lateral  blow  to  the  knee  during  a  tackle  in a  football  game  injures  a  24-year-old  woman.  Field examination reveals an “anterior drawer sign.” An MRI demonstrates  injury  to  several  structures  of  the  knee, including her medial meniscus. Which structure might also have been injured by the tackle?   A.  Medial collateral ligament   B.  Lateral collateral ligament   C.  Lateral meniscus   D.  Posterior cruciate ligament   E.  Tendon of the semitendinosus	A.  Medial collateral ligament
A  50-year-old  woman  is  admitted  to  the  emer- gency  department  complaining  of  painful  swelling  to the  left  leg,  fever,  and  malaise  for  2  days.  The  patient has a history of type 2 diabetes mellitus, and she was bitten  on  the  left  leg  by  an  insect  a  week  before  presentation.  She  scratched  the  pruritic  area  and  applied alcohol to the site when the swelling increased; a purulent  fluid  began  to  drain  from  it  2  days  later.  During physical  examination,  the  patient  was  febrile  (40° C) with  5  ×  5 cm  tender,  fluctuant  swelling  over  the anterolateral  aspect  of  the  middle  third  of  the  left  leg, which  drained  copious  amounts  of  purulent  fluid. Which of the following findings is most likely to be also present during physical examination of this patient?   A.  Tender vertical group of superficial inguinal lymph nodes   B.  Enlarged horizontal group of superficial inguinal lymph nodes   C.  Enlarged group of deep inguinal lymph nodes    D.  Enlarged popliteal lymph nodes    E.  Enlarged iliac nodes	C.  Enlarged group of deep inguinal lymph nodes
A 30-year-old woman was admitted to the emer- gency  department  after  being  involved  in  a  motor vehicle  crash.  The  patient  complained  of  pain  to  the right hip and knee. During physical examination, there is no deformity of the lower limb, but there is tender- ness  over  the  right  ischiopubic  ramus.  Pelvic  radiographs  revealed  an  inferiorly  displaced  fracture  of  the right superior and inferior pubic rami with dislocation of  the  right  sacroiliac  joint  and  pubic  symphysis.  The patient  was  referred  to  the  orthopedics  team,  which had  a  high  suspicion  of  rupture  of  the  right  obturator membrane. What clinical findings are most likely to be present in this patient?   A.  Urinary and fecal incontinence and diminished sensation over the perineum    B.  Weak adduction of the hip and diminished sensation over the upper medial thigh   C.  Weak abduction of the hip and positive Trendelenburg sign   D.  Weak flexion of the hip and diminished sensation over the anterior thigh and medial leg   E.  Weak extension of the hip and diminished sensation over the posterior thigh	B.  Weak adduction of the hip and diminished sensation over the upper medial thigh
A  32-year-old  man  is  brought  to  the  emergency department  with  complaints  of  pain  to  the  left  ankle and  knee.  The  patient  recalls  that  during  a  football game, his left foot landed in a hole as he was running on  an  uneven  dirt  field.  The  ankle  was  externally rotated  and  everted  while  the  knee  twisted  medially. He  was  unable  to  bear  weight  subsequently.  During physical  examination,  the  right  ankle  is  swollen  and there  is  exquisite  tenderness  over  the  right  medial malleolus  and  the  proximal  lateral  leg.  Radiologic examination of the right lower limb reveals a displaced fracture  of  the  neck  of  right  fibula  and  a  comminuted fracture  of  the  tibial  plafond  and  medial  malleolus. Which  of  the  following  describes  the  most  likely  consequences of this injury?   A.  Weak “push-off” while walking and numbness over the posteromedial leg   B.  Weak ankle eversion and numbness over the dorsum of the foot   C.  High stepping gait and numbness over the dorsum and first web space of the foot   D.  Waddling gait and inability to feel a pin prick over the anterolateral leg   E.  Swing-out gait and numbness over the medial leg	C.  High stepping gait and numbness over the dorsum and first web space of the foot
A 40-year-old man was brought to the emergency department after being struck by a car. He complained of  pain  to  the  left  knee  and  leg  and  inability  to  bear weight on the affected limb. On examination, there was a  joint  effusion  of  the  left  knee,  and  tenderness  over the medial and lateral side of the joint. A valgus stress test was positive while the varus stress test was nega- tive. An MRI of the left knee showed complete disruption  of  multiple  ligament  support  structures  of  the knee. What other symptoms are most likely possible in this patient?   A.  Inability to extend the knee   B.  Inability to flex the knee   C.  Instability of the knee when walking down a flight of stairs   D.  Instability of the knee when walking up a flight of stairs   E.  Excessive extension of the knee and difficulty walking down stairs	D.  Instability of the knee when walking up a flight of stairs
A  19-year-old  woman  is  admitted  to  the  emergency department with complaints of pain and swelling to  the  right  ankle.  In  a  recent  volleyball  game  she jumped to spike the ball then landed on the opponent’s shoe  with  her  right  foot.  She  recalls  hearing  a  loud “pop”  and  felt  immediate  pain  to  the  ankle.  She  was unable  to  bear  weight  subsequently.  On  examination, the right ankle was swollen, with maximal tenderness inferior  and  anterior  to  the  lateral  malleolus.  Radiographs of the ankle showed no fractures. Which of the following structures were most likely injured?   A.  Posterior talofibular ligament   B.  Interosseous ligament between the tibia and fibula   C.  Tibionavicular ligament    D.  Anterior tibiofibular ligament    E.  Calcaneofibular ligament	E.  Calcaneofibular ligament
A  30-year-old  woman  is  admitted  to  the  emer- gency department with complaints of pain to the ante- rior left thigh. While participating in a 100-meter race, she felt a sudden onset of pain in the anterior midthigh area  and  could  only  limp  to  the  finish  line.  Physical examination  revealed  a  swollen,  tender  right  thigh anteriorly.  Extension  of  the  knee  was  limited  due  to pain.  Ultrasonography  of  the  area  revealed  a  defect  in the  fibers  of  the  quadriceps  muscle,  confirmed  by  CT scan of the limb. Which of the following is the embryologic origin of the affected structure?   A.  Lateral plate mesoderm   B.  Dorsolateral migration of neural crest cells   C.  Preceded the development of chondrification centers   D.  Intermediate mesoderm    E.  Migration of cells from paraxial mesoderm	E.  Migration of cells from paraxial mesoderm
A 23-year-old woman delivered a live male infant at  37  weeks’  gestation  after  an  uneventful  pregnancy. Examination of the infant revealed the right second and third  toes  were  fused.  Radiographs  of  the  right  foot indicated  14  phalanges  in  their  correct  position.  After review  by  the  pediatric  orthopedic  surgeon,  corrective surgery for the deformity was scheduled. Which of the following embryologic conditions explains the infant’s condition?   A.  The digital ray for the third toe did not develop   B.  Excessive neural crest cell migration into the foot   C.  Incomplete apoptosis of tissue between digital rays   D.  Lack of signal from the zone of polarizing activity (ZPA)   E.  Faulty development of chondrification centers	C.  Incomplete apoptosis of tissue between digital rays
A 30-year-old man was brought to the emergency department  after  his  involvement  in  a  motor  vehicle crash. He complained of pain in the right knee and an inability  to  bear  weight.  On  examination,  there  were minor abrasions about his body, in addition to a deep, 5 cm  oblique  laceration  over  the  anterior  right  knee, which  exposed  the  patella.  He  was  unable  to  extend the right knee. Radiographs revealed a displaced transverse  fracture  of  the  inferior  pole  of  the  patella.  The superior  fragment  of  the  patella  appeared  to  be  “high riding”  over  the  anterior  surface  of  the  femur.  Which of the following most likely occurred?    A.  Blood and fat from the injury can enter the popliteus bursa   B.  Blood and fat from the injury can enter the suprapatellar bursa   C.  Joint fluid can enter the subcutaneous infrapatellar bursa   D.  The deep infrapatellar bursa will be affected    E.  The gastrocnemius bursa will not be affected	B.  Blood and fat from the injury can enter the suprapatellar bursa
A 53-year-old woman reports difficulty in walking. Physical examination showed a positive Trendelenburg sign when she is asked to stand on her right leg. Which nerve  has  been  compromised  to  produce  the  positive sign?   A.  Sciatic   B.  Right superior gluteal   C.  Left inferior gluteal   D.  Left superior gluteal   E.  Right inferior gluteal	B.  Right superior gluteal
A  45-year-old  man  is  admitted  to  the  emergency department  after  a  fall  and  subsequent  leg  injury.  On physical  examination  the  patient  has  a  foot  drop  but eversion  is  unaffected.  Which  nerve  is  most  likely injured?   A.  Tibial   B.  Common fibular (peroneal)   C.  Superficial fibular (peroneal)   D.  Saphenous   E.  Deep fibular (peroneal)	E.  Deep fibular (peroneal)
A 48-year-old man comes to the physician because of severe back pain for 2 days. The pain radiates down to  the  buttock,  posterior  thigh,  and  posterolateral  leg. He  also  has  numbness  on  the  lateral  side  of  his  left foot.  On  physical  examination  sensation  to  pain  is decreased  over  the  lateral  side  of  the  left  foot.  Deep tendon  reflexes  are  absent  at  the  left  ankle,  and  there is a weakness of dorsiflexion of the left foot. Compression of which of the following nerve roots is the most likely cause of these findings?   A.  T12   B.  L2   C.  L4   D.  S1   E.  S3	D.  S1
A  45-year-old  man  after  being  diagnosed  with  a posterior  acetabular  fracture  is  taken  to  the  operating room  to  repair  the  fracture.  During  the  neurological examination the  physician notices  loss of  sensation  to the  skin  of  the  inferior  half  of  the  buttocks,  posterior, and  upper  medial  thigh.  The  patient  had  a  normal neurovascular  examination  preoperatively.  Which  of the following nerves was mostly likely damaged during the operation?   A.  Posterior femoral cutaneous   B.  Obturator nerve   C.  Sciatic   D.  Femoral   E.  Lateral femoral cutaneous	A.  Posterior femoral cutaneous
A  30-year-old  woman  is  admitted  to  the  emer- gency department with complaints of pain to the anterior left thigh. While participating in a 100-meter race, she felt a sudden onset of pain in the anterior midthigh area  and  could  only  limp  to  the  finish  line.  Physical examination  revealed  a  swollen,  tender  right  thigh anteriorly.  Extension  of  the  knee  was  limited  due  to pain.  Ultrasonography  of  the  area  revealed  a  defect  in the  fibers  of  the  quadriceps  muscle,  confirmed  by  CT scan of the limb. Which of the following is the embryo- logic origin of the affected structure?   A.  Lateral plate mesoderm   B.  Dorsolateral migration of neural crest cells   C.  Preceded the development of chondrification centers   D.  Intermediate mesoderm    E.  Migration of cells from paraxial mesoderm	E.  Migration of cells from paraxial mesoderm
A 32-year-old man was brought to the emergency with complaints of pain to the left ankle and leg. During a game of football, his left foot landed in a hole as he was  running  on  an  uneven  dirt  field.  He  was  unable subsequently bear weight on his left limb. On examination, the right ankle was swollen, with exquisite tenderness over the right medial malleolus and over the distal third  of  the  lateral  right  leg.  Radiographs  of  the  right lower  limb  revealed  an  inferiorly  displaced  fracture  of the  right  medial  malleolus  and  a  spiral  fracture  of  the distal  third  of  the  right  fibula.  Which  of  the  following describes the most likely mechanism of this injury?   A.  Forceful inversion of the ankle   B.  Direct upward force from the talus into the tibial plafond   C.  Forceful external rotation and eversion of the ankle   D.  Forceful dorsiflexion of the foot    E.  Extreme plantar flexion of the foot	C.  Forceful external rotation and eversion of the ankle
A 15-year-old boy falls and injures his ankle while skateboarding.  Examination  in  the  emergency  department  leads  to  the  conclusion  that  the  ankle  is  mildly sprained,  and  it  is  wrapped  with  an  elastic  bandage. The boy still complains of pain in his ankle. Which of the following peripheral nerves is involved in carrying pain sensation from the ankle?    A.  Deep fibular (peroneal)    B.  Femoral    C.  Obturator    D.  Posterior femoral cutaneous    E.  Sural	A.  Deep fibular (peroneal)
A 1-year-old girl is admitted to the hospital with a  palpable  mass  in  her  labia  majora.  Radiographic examination reveals that a loop of intestine has herniated into the visibly enlarged labium majus. This condition is due to failure of the processus vaginalis to close off.  From  which  of  the  following  tissue  layers  is  the processus derived?   A.  Parietal peritoneum   B.  Extraperitoneal tissue   C.  Transversalis fascia   D.  Dartos fascia   E.  Internal abdominal oblique aponeurosis	A.  Parietal peritoneum
A 3-year-old boy is admitted to the hospital with signs  of  acute  renal  failure.  Radiologic  studies  reveal that the boy has bilateral masses involving both kidneys. Examination of biopsy material confirms the diagnosis of Wilms tumor. Which of the following gene mutations is the most common in Wilms tumor?   A.  The gene responsible for WT1   B.  The gene responsible for HGF   C.  The gene responsible for VEGF   D.  The gene responsible for GDNF   E.  The gene responsible for FGF-2	A.  The gene responsible for WT1
Fusion  of  the  caudal  portions  of  the  kidneys during embryonic development is most likely to result in which of the following congenital conditions?   A.  Bicornuate uterus   B.  Cryptorchidism   C.  Horseshoe kidney   D.  Hypospadias   E.  Renal agenesis	C.  Horseshoe kidney
Which of the following congenital malformations will most predictably result in oligohydramnios?   A.  Anencephaly   B.  Pyloric stenosis   C.  Renal agenesis   D.  Tracheoesophageal fistula   E.  Urethral atresia	C.  Renal agenesis
Failure  to  urinate  during  embryonic  or  fetal  life usually  causes  respiratory  difficulties  postnatally. Which of the following relationships best describes this situation?   A.  Oligohydramnios linked with hypoplastic lungs   B.  Polycystic kidneys linked to tracheoesophageal fistula   C.  Polyhydramnios    D.  Renal agenesis linked to insufficient surfactant    E.  Urethral obstruction linked to ectopic viscera	A.  Oligohydramnios linked with hypoplastic lungs
A 4-year-old male child is admitted to the hospital with  severe  vomiting.  Radiologic  examination  and history  taking  reveals  that  the  boy  suffers  from  an annular pancreas. Which of the following structures is most typically obstructed by this condition?   A.  Pylorus of the stomach   B.  First part of the duodenum   C.  Second part of the duodenum   D.  Third part of the duodenum   E.  Jejunum	C.  Second part of the duodenum
A 3-year-old male child is admitted to the pediatric  clinic.  Diagnosis  reveals  that  the  intermediate portion  of  the  processus  vaginalis  is  not  obliterated. Which  of  the  following  conditions  will  most  likely result from this?   A.  Hypospadias   B.  Sterility   C.  Congenital hydrocele   D.  Ectopic testis   E.  Epispadias	C.  Congenital hydrocele
Testicles are absent from the scrotum of a 1-year-old male admitted to the pediatric clinic. The pediatrician examined the infant and palpated the testes in the inguinal canal. Which of the following terms is used to describe this condition?   A.  Pseudohermaphroditism   B.  True hermaphroditism   C.  Cryptorchism   D.  Congenital adrenal hyperplasia   E.  Chordee	C.  Cryptorchism
A 28-year-old woman who is 8 months pregnant goes to the outpatient clinic for her prenatal checkup. Ultrasound examination of the fetus reveals gastroschisis,  with  herniation  of  the  small  bowel  into  the  amniotic cavity. Failure of proper formation of which of the following structure(s) has resulted in this condition?   A.  Head fold   B.  Tail fold   C.  Neural folds   D.  Lateral folds   E.  Amnion	D.  Lateral folds
Rotation  of  the  stomach  during  development results  in  movement  of  the  left  vagus  nerve  from  its original  position.  Through  approximately  how  many degrees  of  rotation  does  the  nerve  move,  and  what  is its final position?   A.  90 degrees to become the anterior vagal trunk   B.  90 degrees to become the posterior vagal trunk   C.  270 degrees to become the anterior vagal trunk   D.  270 degrees to become the posterior vagal trunk   E.  180 degrees to become the right vagal trunk	A.  90 degrees to become the anterior vagal trunk
A newborn baby was diagnosed with eventration of  the  diaphragm,  wherein  one  half  of  the  diaphragm ascends  into  the  thorax  during  inspiration,  but  the other  half  contracts  normally.  What  is  the  most  likely cause of this condition?   A.  Absence of a pleuropericardial fold   B.  Absence of musculature in one half of the diaphragm   C.  Failure of migration of the diaphragm    D.  Failure of development of the septum transversum   E.  Absence of a pleuroperitoneal fold	B.  Absence of musculature in one half of the diaphragm
A  2-day-old  newborn  male  is  cyanotic  after attempts to swallow milk result in collection of the milk in his mouth. After 2 days he develops aspiration pneumonia. A tracheoesophageal fistula is suspected. Which of  the  following  structures  has  most  likely  failed  to develop properly?   A.  Esophagus   B.  Trachea   C.  Tongue   D.  Tracheoesophageal septum   E.  Pharynx	D.  Tracheoesophageal septum
A  3-day-old  newborn  male  has  difficulties  in breathing.  A  computed  tomography  (CT)  scan  of  his chest  and  abdomen  reveals  the  absence  of  the  central tendon of the diaphragm. Which of the following struc- tures most likely failed to develop properly?   A.  Pleuroperitoneal folds   B.  Pleuropericardial folds   C.  Septum transversum   D.  Cervical myotomes   E.  Dorsal mesentery of the esophagus	C.  Septum transversum
A  1-month-old  infant  with  bilious  vomiting  and feeding intolerance is examined by the pediatric team. Imaging  reveals  malrotation  of  the  small  intestine without fixation of the mesenteries. The vessels around the  duodenojejunal  junction  are  obstructed  and  the intestine  is  at  risk  of  becoming  gangrenous.  Which  of the following has occurred to cause the obstruction?   A.  Diaphragmatic atresia   B.  Subhepatic cecum   C.  Midgut volvulus   D.  Duplication of the intestine   E.  Congenital megacolon	C.  Midgut volvulus
A  5-day-old  male  infant  is  diagnosed  with Hirschsprung disease. CT scan examination reveals an abnormally dilated colon. Which of the following is the most  likely  embryologic  mechanism  responsible  for Hirschsprung disease?   A.  Failure of neural crest cells to migrate into the walls of the colon   B.  Incomplete separation of the cloaca    C.  Failure of recanalization of the colon    D.  Defective rotation of the hindgut    E.  Oligohydramnios	A.  Failure of neural crest cells to migrate into the walls of the colon
A 1-day-old female infant has a mass protruding through her umbilicus. Physical examination reveals an umbilical hernia. A CT scan reveals that part of another organ  is  attached  to  the  inner  surface  of  the  hernia. What portion of the gastrointestinal tract is most likely to  be  attached  to  the  inner  surface  of  the  umbilical hernia?   A.  Anal canal   B.  Appendix   C.  Cecum   D.  Ileum   E.  Stomach	D.  Ileum
A 38-year-old pregnant woman is admitted to the emergency  department  with  severe  vaginal  bleeding. Ultrasound  examination  confirms  the  initial  diagnosis of  ectopic  pregnancy.  Which  of  the  following  is  the most common site of an ectopic pregnancy?   A.  Uterine tubes   B.  Cervix   C.  Mesentery of the abdominal wall   D.  Lower part of uterine body overlapping the internal cervical os   E.  Fundus of the uterus	A.  Uterine tubes
A  23-year-old  woman  is  admitted  with  severe abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting. History taking shows  that  the  pain  is  severe  and  has  been  constant for 4 days. The pain began in the epigastric region and radiated  bilaterally  around  the  chest  to  just  below  the scapulae.  Currently  the  pain  is  localized  in  the  right hypochondrium. A CT scan examination reveals calcified  stones  in  the  gallbladder.  Which  of  the  following nerves carries the afferent fibers of the referred pain?   A.  Greater thoracic splanchnic nerves   B.  Dorsal primary rami of intercostal nerves   C.  Phrenic nerves   D.  Vagus nerves   E.  Pelvic splanchnic nerves	A.  Greater thoracic splanchnic nerves
A  32-year-old  man  is  admitted  to  the  emergency department  with  groin  pain.  Examination  reveals  that the  patient  has  an  indirect  inguinal  hernia.  Which  of the  following  nerves  is  compressed  by  the  herniating structure in the inguinal canal to give the patient pain?   A.  Iliohypogastric   B.  Lateral femoral cutaneous   C.  Ilioinguinal   D.  Subcostal   E.  Pudendal	C.  Ilioinguinal
A  54-year-old  man  is  admitted  to  the  emergency department with severe upper abdominal pain. Gastroscopy reveals a tumor in the antrum of the stomach. A CT scan is ordered to evaluate lymphatic drainage of the stomach. Which of the following lymph nodes is most likely to be involved in a malignancy of the stomach?   A.  Celiac   B.  Superior mesenteric   C.  Inferior mesenteric   D.  Lumbar   E.  Hepatic	A.  Celiac
During a scheduled laparoscopic cholecystectomy in  a  47-year-old  female  patient,  the  resident  accidentally  clamped  the  hepatoduodenal  ligament  instead  of the cystic artery. Which of the following vessels would most likely be occluded in this iatrogenic injury?   A.  Superior mesenteric artery   B.  Proper hepatic artery   C.  Splenic artery   D.  Common hepatic artery   E.  Inferior vena cava	B.  Proper hepatic artery
A  45-year-old  man  was  admitted  to  the  hospital with  groin  pain  and  a  palpable  mass  just  superior  to the inguinal ligament. The patient was diagnosed with an inguinal hernia and a surgical repair was performed. During the operation the surgeon found a loop of intes- tine passing through the deep inguinal ring. Which of the following types of hernia was this?    A.  Direct inguinal    B.  Umbilical    C.  Femoral    D.  Lumbar    E.  Indirect inguinal	E.  Indirect inguinal
A  55-year-old  man  was  admitted  to  the  hospital with severe abdominal pain. Gastroscopy and CT scan examinations revealed a perforating ulcer in the poste- rior wall of the stomach. Where would peritonitis most likely develop initially?   A.  Right subhepatic space   B.  Hepatorenal space (of Morison)   C.  Omental bursa (lesser sac)   D.  Right subphrenic space   E.  Greater sac	C.  Omental bursa (lesser sac)
A  58-year-old  male  alcoholic  is  admitted  to  the hospital after vomiting dark red blood (hematemesis). Endoscopy  reveals  ruptured  esophageal  varices,  most likely resulting from portal hypertension. Which of the following venous tributaries to the portal system anastomoses with caval veins to cause the varices?   A.  Splenic   B.  Left gastro-omental   C.  Left gastric   D.  Left hepatic   E.  Right gastric	C.  Left gastric
A 45-year-old man entered the emergency department  with  a  complaint  of  severe  abdominal  pain. During  physical  examination  it  is  observed  that  his cremasteric  reflex  is  absent.  Which  of  the  following nerves is responsible for the efferent limb of the cremasteric reflex?   A.  Ilioinguinal   B.  Iliohypogastric   C.  Genitofemoral   D.  Pudendal   E.  Ventral ramus of T12	C.  Genitofemoral
The  decision  is  made  by  emergency  department surgeons  to  perform  an  exploratory  laparotomy  on  a 32-year-old female with severe abdominal pain. Where would the incision most likely be made to separate the left and right rectus sheaths?   A.  Midaxillary line   B.  Arcuate line   C.  Semilunar line    D.  Tendinous intersection    E.  Linea alba	E.  Linea alba
After  a  “tummy-tuck”  (abdominoplasty)  proce- dure is performed on a 45-year-old man, which of the following  layers  of  the  abdominal  wall  will  hold  the sutures?   A.  Scarpa’s fascia (membranous layer)   B.  Camper’s fascia (fatty layer)   C.  Transversalis fascia   D.  Extraperitoneal tissue   E.  External abdominal oblique aponeurosis	A.  Scarpa’s fascia (membranous layer)
A 49-year-old man presents with acute abdominal pain and jaundice. Radiologic studies reveal a tumor in the head of the pancreas. Which of the following structures is most likely being obstructed?   A.  Common bile duct   B.  Common hepatic duct   C.  Cystic duct   D.  Accessory pancreatic duct   E.  Proper hepatic artery	A.  Common bile duct
A  44-year-old  man  is  admitted  to  the  emergency department  with  excessive  vomiting  and  dehydration. Radiologic  images  demonstrate  that  part  of  the  bowel is being compressed between the abdominal aorta and the superior mesenteric artery, the so-called “nutcracker syndrome.” Which of the following intestinal structures is most likely being compressed?   A.  Second part of duodenum   B.  Transverse colon   C.  Third part of duodenum   D.  First part of duodenum   E.  Jejunum	C.  Third part of duodenum
During the surgical repair of a perforated duodenal ulcer in a 47-year-old male patient, the gastroduodenal  artery  is  ligated.  A  branch  of  which  of  the following arteries will continue to supply blood to the pancreas in this patient?   A.  Inferior mesenteric   B.  Left gastric   C.  Right gastric   D.  Proper hepatic   E.  Superior mesenteric	E.  Superior mesenteric
A  70-year-old  man  is  admitted  to  the  emergency department  with  severe  diarrhea.  An  arteriogram reveals  90%  blockage  at  the  origin  of  the  inferior mesenteric artery from the aorta. Which of the follow- ing arteries would most likely provide collateral supply to the descending colon?   A.  Left gastroepiploic artery   B.  Middle colic artery   C.  Sigmoid artery   D.  Splenic artery   E.  Superior rectal artery	B.  Middle colic artery
A  24-year-old  woman  has  a  dull  aching  pain  in the  umbilical  region,  and  flexion  of  the  hip  against resistance (psoas test) causes a sharp pain in the right lower  abdominal  quadrant.  Which  of  the  following structures is most likely inflamed to cause the pain?   A.  Appendix   B.  Bladder   C.  Gallbladder   D.  Pancreas   E.  Uterus	A.  Appendix
A  35-year-old  man  is  admitted  to  the  hospital from  the  emergency  department  because  of  excruciating  pain  in  the  back  and  left  shoulder.  A  CT  scan reveals an abscess in the upper part of the left kidney, but no abnormality is detected in the shoulder region. The shoulder pain may be caused by the spread of the inflammation  to  which  of  the  following  neighboring structures?   A.  Descending colon   B.  Diaphragm   C.  Duodenum   D.  Spleen   E.  Pancreas	B.  Diaphragm
A 62-year-old man is admitted to the hospital with dull, diffuse abdominal pain. A CT scan reveals a tumor at  the  head  of  the  pancreas.  The  abdominal  pain  is mediated  by  afferent  fibers  that  travel  initially  with which of the following nerves?   A.  Greater thoracic splanchnic   B.  Intercostal   C.  Phrenic   D.  Vagus   E.  Subcostal	A.  Greater thoracic splanchnic
A 52-year-old man with a history of smoking and hypercholesterolemia is diagnosed with severe athero- sclerosis  affecting  the  arteries  of  his  body.  Laboratory examination reveals extremely low sperm count. Which of the following arteries is most likely occluded?    A.  External iliac    B.  Inferior epigastric    C.  Umbilical    D.  Testicular    E.  Deep circumflex iliac	A.  External iliac
In  a  routine  visit  to  the  outpatient  clinic  for  his annual  checkup,  a  42-year-old  man  is  informed  that ultrasound examination has given strong evidence that he  has  a  tumor  of  his  scrotum  that  appears  not  to  be in  a  testes.  Which  of  the  following  nodes  are  the  first lymph nodes that drain the affected area?   A.  Superficial inguinal   B.  Internal iliac   C.  Lumbar   D.  Presacral   E.  Axillary	A.  Superficial inguinal
A 35-year-old man is admitted to the hospital with an  indirect  inguinal  hernia.  During  an  open  hernioplasty  (in  contrast  to  a  laparoscopic  procedure),  the spermatic  cord  and  the  internal  abdominal  oblique muscles  are  identified.  Which  component  of  the  spermatic  cord  is  derived  from  the  internal  abdominal oblique muscle?   A.  External spermatic fascia   B.  Cremaster muscle   C.  Tunica vaginalis   D.  Internal spermatic fascia   E.  Dartos fascia	B.  Cremaster muscle
A 63-year-old man with a history of alcoholism is brought to the emergency department with hematemesis (vomiting blood). Findings on endoscopic examination  suggest  bleeding  from  esophageal  varices.  The varices  are  most  likely  a  result  of  the  anastomoses between the left gastric vein and which other vessel or vessels?   A.  Azygos system of veins   B.  Inferior vena cava   C.  Left umbilical vein   D.  Superior mesenteric vein   E.  Subcostal veins	A.  Azygos system of veins
A  34-year-old  man  is  undergoing  an  emergency appendectomy. After the appendectomy has been performed  successfully,  the  patient  undergoes  an  exploratory  laparoscopy.  Which  of  the  following  anatomic features are the most useful to distinguish the jejunum from the ileum?  A.  Jejunum has thinner walls compared with the ileum   B.  Jejunum has less mesenteric fat compared with the ileum   C.  Jejunum has more numerous vascular arcades compared with the ileum   D.  Jejunum has more numerous lymphatic follicles beneath the mucosa compared with the ileum   E.  Jejunum has fewer villi compared with the ileum	B.  Jejunum has less mesenteric fat compared with the ileum
After  a  mastectomy,  a  musculocutaneous  flap  is used  to  restore  the  thoracic  contour  in  a  34-year-old female  patient.  The  ipsilateral  (same  side)  rectus abdominis muscle was detached carefully from the sur- rounding  structures  and  transposed  to  the  thoracic wall.  Which  of  the  following  landmarks  is  most  often used  to  locate  the  inferior  end  of  the  posterior,  tendinous layer of the rectus sheath?   A.  Intercristal line   B.  Linea alba   C.  Arcuate line   D.  Pectineal line   E.  Semilunar line	C.  Arcuate line
An  anteroposterior  radiograph  is  taken  of  the lumbar region in a 31-year-old female patient who had been  treated  for  tuberculous  spondylitis  at  vertebral levels  T12  to  L1.  The  patient  has  been  asymptomatic for 10 years. A density is detected; a calcified tuberculous abscess is suspected. Which of the following is the most likely site of the calcified tuberculous abscess?   A.  Body of pancreas   B.  Cecum   C.  Fundus of stomach   D.  Psoas fascia   E.  Suspensory ligament of the duodenum	D.  Psoas fascia
A 45-year-old woman is admitted to the hospital with  symptoms  of  an  upper  bowel  obstruction.  Upon CT  examination  it  is  found  that  the  third  (transverse) portion  of  the  duodenum  is  being  compressed  by  a large  vessel.  Which  of  the  following  vessels  will  most likely be causing the compression?   A.  Inferior mesenteric artery   B.  Superior mesenteric artery   C.  Inferior mesenteric vein   D.  Portal vein   E.  Splenic vein	B.  Superior mesenteric artery
A  61-year-old  woman  had  been  scheduled  for  a cholecystectomy.  During  the  operation  the  scissors  of the  surgical  resident  accidentally  entered  the  tissues immediately posterior to the epiploic (omental) foramen (its  posterior  boundary).  The  surgical  field  was  filled immediately by profuse bleeding. Which of the following vessels was the most likely source of bleeding?   A.  Aorta   B.  Inferior vena cava   C.  Portal vein   D.  Right renal artery   E.  Superior mesenteric vein	B.  Inferior vena cava
A 32-year-old woman was admitted to the hospital with a complaint of pain over her umbilicus. Radiographic  examination  revealed  acute  appendicitis.  The appendix  was  removed  successfully  in  an  emergency appendectomy.  One  week  postoperatively  the  patient complained  of  paresthesia  of  the  skin  over  the  pubic region and the anterior portion of her perineum. Which of the following nerves was most likely injured during the appendectomy?   A.  Genitofemoral   B.  Ilioinguinal   C.  Subcostal   D.  Iliohypogastric   E.  Spinal nerve T9	B.  Ilioinguinal
Exploratory  laparoscopy  was  performed  on  a 34-year-old  man,  following  a  successful  emergency appendectomy.  Which  of  the  following  anatomic  relationships  would  be  seen  clearly,  without  dissection, when the surgeon exposes the beginning of the jejunum?   A.  The second portion of the duodenum is related anteriorly to the hilum of the right kidney.   B.  The superior mesenteric artery and vein pass posterior to the third part of the duodenum.   C.  The portal vein crosses anterior to the neck of the pancreas.   D.  The second part of the duodenum is crossed anteriorly by the attachment of the transverse mesocolon.   E.  The third part of the duodenum is related anteriorly to the hilum of the left kidney.	D.  The second part of the duodenum is crossed anteriorly by the attachment of the transverse mesocolon.
A  30-year-old  female  patient  complains  that  she has  been  weak  and  easily  fatigued  over  the  past  6 months.  She  has  a  3-month  acute  history  of  severe hypertension  that  has  required  treatment  with  antihy- pertensive medications. She has recently gained 4.5 kg (10 lb) and currently weighs 75 kg (165 lb). Her blood pressure is 170/100 mm Hg. Purple striae are seen over the  abdomen  on  physical  examination  and  she  possesses  a  “buffalo  hump.”  Fasting  serum  glucose  concentration  is  140 mg/dL.  A  CT  scan  of  the  abdomen shows  a  6-cm  mass  immediately  posterior  to  the  inferior  vena  cava.  Which  of  the  following  organs  is  the most likely origin of the mass?   A.  Suprarenal (adrenal) gland   B.  Appendix   C.  Gallbladder   D.  Ovary   E.  Uterus	A.  Suprarenal (adrenal) gland
An obese 45-year-old female patient with an elevated temperature comes to the physician’s office complaining  of  nausea  and  intermittent,  acute  pain  in  the right  upper  quadrant  of  the  abdomen  during  the  past 2 days. She has a 24-hour history of jaundice. She has a  history  of  gallstones.  Which  of  the  following  structures has most likely been obstructed by a gallstone?   A.  Common bile duct   B.  Cystic duct   C.  Left hepatic duct   D.  Pancreatic duct   E.  Right hepatic duct	A.  Common bile duct
A  67-year-old  man  has  severe  cirrhosis  of  the liver. He most likely has enlarged anastomoses between which of the following pairs of veins?   A.  Inferior phrenic and superior phrenic   B.  Left colic and middle colic   C.  Left gastric and esophageal   D.  Lumbar and renal   E.  Sigmoid and superior rectal	C.  Left gastric and esophageal
A 45-year-old man is admitted to the hospital with a  massive  hernia  that  passes  through  the  inguinal  triangle  (of  Hesselbach).  Which  of  the  following  structures  is  used  as  a  landmark  to  distinguish  a  direct inguinal hernia from an indirect inguinal hernia?   A.  Inferior epigastric vessels   B.  Femoral canal   C.  Inguinal ligament   D.  Rectus abdominis muscle (lateral border)   E.  Pectineal ligament	A.  Inferior epigastric vessels
A 36-year-old man was brought to the emergency department with a bullet wound to the abdomen. The bullet penetrated the anterior abdominal wall superior to the umbilicus. If the bullet passed directly posterior in  the  midline,  which  of  the  following  structures  was most likely to have been struck first by the bullet?   A.  Abdominal aorta   B.  Transverse colon   C.  Stomach   D.  Gallbladder   E.  Pancreas	B.  Transverse colon
A  48-year-old  man  has  had  three  episodes  of upper gastrointestinal bleeding from esophageal varices. He has a history of chronic alcoholism but has recently been  rehabilitated.  Further  evaluation  shows  ascites and  splenomegaly.  Which  of  the  following  surgical venous anastomoses is most commonly used to relieve these  symptoms  and  signs  before  a  liver  transplant  is attempted?   A.  Left gastric to splenic vein   B.  Right gastric to left gastric vein   C.  Right renal to right gonadal vein   D.  Splenic to left renal vein   E.  Superior mesenteric to inferior mesenteric vein	D.  Splenic to left renal vein
A 55-year-old man is admitted to the hospital with nausea, vomiting, and hematuria. A CT scan reveals a neoplasm  in  the  posterior  surface  of  the  inferior  pole of  the  left  kidney  that  has  invaded  through  the  renal pelvis,  renal  capsule,  ureter,  and  fat.  To  which  of  the following regions will pain most likely be referred?   A.  Skin of the anterior and lateral thighs and femoral triangle   B.  Skin over the gluteal region, pubis, medial thigh, and scrotal areas   C.  Skin over the medial, anterior, and lateral side of the thigh   D.  Skin over the pubis and umbilicus    E.  Skin over the pubis, umbilicus, and posterior abdominal wall muscles	B.  Skin over the gluteal region, pubis, medial thigh, and scrotal areas
A  30-year-old  female  patient  has  complained  of weakness and fatigue over the past 6 months. She has a 3-month acute history of severe hypertension that has not responded to antihypertensive medications. Fasting serum glucose concentration is 140 mg/dL. A CT scan of  the  abdomen  shows  a  6-cm  mass  in  the  adrenal gland  affecting  the  secretory  cells  of  the  adrenal medulla.  Which  of  the  following  structures  is  most likely  releasing  products  into  the  bloodstream  to produce the hypertension and other signs?   A.  Preganglionic sympathetic axons in thoracic splanchnic nerves    B.  Cells of neural crest origin that migrated to the adrenal medulla   C.  Preganglionic parasympathetic branches of the posterior vagal trunk   D.  Postganglionic parasympathetic branches of the left or right vagus nerves   E.  Postganglionic fibers from pelvic splanchnic nerves	B.  Cells of neural crest origin that migrated to the adrenal medulla
A 48-year-old man is admitted to the hospital with severe abdominal pain. Radiologic examination reveals a  tumor  in  the  tail  of  the  pancreas.  A  diagnostic  arteriogram  shows  that  the  tumor  has  compromised  the blood supply to another organ. Which of the following organs is most likely to have its blood supply compromised by this tumor?   A.  Duodenum   B.  Gallbladder   C.  Kidney   D.  Liver   E.  Spleen	E.  Spleen
A  57-year-old  man  is  admitted  to  the  emergency department  with  left  flank  pain.  Blood  tests  indicate hematuria  and  anemia.  A  magnetic  resonance  scan reveals  that  blood  flow  in  the  left  renal  vein  is  being occluded  by  an  arterial  aneurysm  where  the  vein crosses the aorta. The aneurysm is most likely located in which of the following arteries?   A.  Celiac   B.  Inferior mesenteric   C.  Left colic   D.  Middle colic   E.  Superior mesenteric	E.  Superior mesenteric
A  57-year-old  man  is  admitted  to  the  emergency department  with  pain  in  his  left  flank  and  testicles. Laboratory tests indicate hematuria and anemia. A CT scan examination provides evidence that blood flow in the  left  renal  vein  is  being  occluded  where  it  crosses anterior to the aorta. Which of the following is the most likely cause of the testicular pain?   A.  Compression of the testicular artery   B.  Occlusion of flow of blood in the testicular vein   C.  Compression of the afferent fibers in the lumbar splanchnic nerves   D.  Compression of the sympathetic fibers in the preaortic plexus   E.  Compression of the posterior vagus nerve	B.  Occlusion of flow of blood in the testicular vein
A  51-year-old  woman  is  admitted  to  the  hospital with an acutely painful abdomen. Radiographic examination  reveals  penetration  of  the  fundic  region  of  the stomach by an ulcer, resulting in intraabdominal bleeding.  Which  of  the  following  arteries  is  the  most  likely source of the bleeding?   A.  Common hepatic artery   B.  Inferior phrenic artery   C.  Left gastroepiploic artery   D.  Short gastric artery   E.  Splenic artery	D.  Short gastric artery
A 39-year-old woman is admitted to the hospital with  pain  radiating  to  her  inguinal  region.  Radiologic and  physical  examination  reveal  a  herniation.  Which of the following is the most common type of hernia in a female patient?   A.  Femoral hernia   B.  Umbilical hernia   C.  Direct inguinal hernia   D.  Indirect inguinal hernia   E.  Epigastric hernia	D.  Indirect inguinal hernia
Radiologic  examination  of  a  42-year-old  woman reveals  penetration  of  the  duodenal  bulb  by  an  ulcer, resulting in profuse intraabdominal bleeding. Which of the  following  arteries  is  the  most  likely  source  of  the bleeding?   A.  Posterior superior pancreaticoduodenal   B.  Superior mesenteric   C.  Inferior mesenteric   D.  Inferior pancreaticoduodenal   E.  Right gastric	A.  Posterior superior pancreaticoduodenal
A 23-year-old man is admitted to the hospital with a bulge in his scrotum. Physical examination reveals an indirect inguinal hernia. During the open hernia repair the internal spermatic fascia is identified and reflected to  expose  the  ductus  deferens  and  testicular  vessels. From  which  of  the  following  does  the  internal  spermatic fascial layer of the spermatic cord develop?   A.  External abdominal oblique aponeurosis   B.  Internal abdominal oblique aponeurosis   C.  Transversus abdominis aponeurosis   D.  Transversalis fascia   E.  Processus vaginalis	D.  Transversalis fascia
A  45-year-old  woman  is  admitted  to  the  emer- gency department with a complaint of severe abdominal pain. CT scan and MRI examinations reveal a tumor of  the  head  of  the  pancreas  involving  the  uncinate process.  Which  of  the  following  vessels  is  most  likely to be occluded?   A.  Common hepatic artery   B.  Cystic artery and vein   C.  Superior mesenteric artery   D.  Inferior mesenteric artery   E.  Portal vein	C.  Superior mesenteric artery
A  35-year-old  obese  man  is  admitted  to  the  hospital with jaundice and complaints of abdominal pain. Physical  examination  reveals  an  epigastric  pain  that migrates  toward  the  patient’s  right  side  and  posterior toward  the  scapula.  Radiographic  examination  reveals multiple gallstones, consistent with the patient’s jaundice  and  typical  pains  of  cholecystitis.  Which  of  the following  structures  is  most  likely  obstructed  by  the gallstones?   A.  Common bile duct   B.  Cystic duct   C.  Left hepatic duct   D.  Pancreatic duct   E.  Right hepatic duct	A.  Common bile duct
A 36-year-old woman is admitted to the hospital for  the  imminent  birth  of  her  baby.  The  decision  is made  to  perform  an  emergency  cesarean  section.  A Pfannenstiel  incision  is  used  to  reach  the  uterus  by making  a  transverse  incision  through  the  external sheath  of  the  rectus  muscles,  about  2 cm  above  the pubic  bones.  It  follows  natural  folds  of  the  skin  and curves  superior  to  the  mons  pubis.  Which  of  the  following  nerves  is  most  at  risk  when  this  incision  is made?   A.  T10   B.  T11   C.  Iliohypogastric   D.  Ilioinguinal   E.  Lateral femoral cutaneous	C.  Iliohypogastric
A 37-year-old woman was admitted to the emergency  department  with  high  fever  (39.5°  C),  nausea, and vomiting. Physical examination revealed increased abdominal  pain  in  the  paraumbilical  region,  rebound tenderness over McBurney’s point, and a positive psoas test.  Blood  tests  showed  marked  leukocytosis.  Which of the following is the most likely diagnosis?   A.  Ectopic pregnancy   B.  Appendicitis   C.  Cholecystitis   D.  Kidney stone   E.  Perforation of the duodenum	B.  Appendicitis
A 56-year-old man is admitted to the hospital with severe  abdominal  pain.  The  patient  has  a  history  of “irritable bowel syndrome” affecting his rectum. Which of the following nerves will most likely be responsible for the transmission of pain in this case?   A.  Lumbar sympathetic trunks   B.  Pelvic splanchnic nerves   C.  Pudendal nerves   D.  Sacral sympathetic trunks   E.  Vagus nerves	B.  Pelvic splanchnic nerves
A 42-year-old woman is admitted to the hospital due to blood in her stools. Physical examination reveals no signs of inflammation, infection, or tumor. An endoscopic  examination  of  the  distal  segment  of  the  ileum reveals  a  lesion  of  the  intestinal  wall.  Biopsy  gives histologic  evidence  that  the  lesion  contains  gastric mucosa. Which of the following clinical conditions will most likely explain the symptoms and signs?   A.  Internal hemorrhoids   B.  External hemorrhoids   C.  Diverticulosis   D.  Meckel’s diverticulum   E.  Borborygmi	D.  Meckel’s diverticulum
An  80-year-old  man  is  admitted  to  the  hospital with hypertension. His history includes a notation that he has had a poor appetite for some time. During physical  examination  it  is  observed  that  his  blood  pressure is 175/95 mm Hg and that he has a marked pulsation in  his  epigastric  region.  Which  of  the  following  diagnoses will most likely explain the symptoms and signs?   A.  Hiatal hernia   B.  Splenomegaly   C.  Cirrhosis of the liver   D.  Aortic aneurysm   E.  Kidney stone	D.  Aortic aneurysm
A 48-year-old woman is admitted to the hospital with  a  distended  abdomen.  A  CT  scan  examination provides evidence of the presence of ascites (Fig. 3-1). In which of the following locations will an ultrasound machine most likely confirm the presence of the ascitic fluid with the patient in the supine position?   A.  Subphrenic recess   B.  Hepatorenal recess (pouch of Morison)   C.  Rectouterine recess (pouch of Douglas)   D.  Vesicouterine recess   E.  Subhepatic recess	B.  Hepatorenal recess (pouch of Morison)
A 19-year-old man is admitted to the hospital after an  automobile  collision.  An  MRI  examination  reveals that the spinal cord has been transected at the L4 cord level.  Which  of  the  following  portions  of  the  intestine will most predictably lose parasympathetic innervation from the central nervous system?   A.  Jejunum   B.  Ascending colon   C.  Ileum   D.  Descending colon   E.  Transverse colon	D.  Descending colon
A  55-year-old  man  is  admitted  to  the  hospital because  of  severe  weight  loss  over  the  preceding 6-month period of time. Radiographic examination and other  tests  provide  evidence  that  a  tumor  is  causing portal hypertension. Laboratory studies reveal that the patient has fatty stool, malnutrition, and liver hypoxia. At which of the following locations is the tumor most likely located?   A.  Right lobe of the liver   B.  Left lobe of the liver   C.  Porta hepatis   D.  Falciform ligament   E.  Hepatogastric ligament	C.  Porta hepatis
During  a  laparoscopic  cholecystectomy  on  a  61-year-old man, which of the following arteries must be clamped to remove the gallbladder safely?   A.  Common hepatic   B.  Proper hepatic   C.  Right hepatic    D.  Left hepatic    E.  Cystic	E.  Cystic
A 45-year-old woman is admitted to the hospital after  her  automobile  left  the  highway  in  a  rainstorm and  hit  a  tree.  She  had  been  wearing  a  seat  belt.  On radiographic  examination,  it  is  observed  that  she  has suffered fractures of the ninth and tenth rib on her left side and that she has intraabdominal bleeding. Physical examination  reveals  hypovolemic  shock  and  progressive  hypotension.  Which  of  the  following  organs  is most likely injured to result in these clinical signs?   A.  Liver   B.  Pancreas   C.  Left kidney   D.  Spleen   E.  Ileum	D.  Spleen
Two  days  after  an  appendectomy  a  45-year-old man has an elevated temperature (39° C), is hypotensive, and complains of abdominal pain. An exploratory laparotomy reveals large amounts of blood in the peri- toneal cavity due to an injury to a vessel that occurred during  the  appendectomy.  Which  of  the  following vessel(s) must be ligated to stop the bleeding?   A.  Right colic artery   B.  Right colic artery and superior rectal artery   C.  Superior mesenteric artery   D.  Ileocolic artery   E.  Ileocolic artery and middle colic artery	D.  Ileocolic artery
A 42-year-old man is admitted to the hospital with severe hematemesis. Radiographic studies reveal hepatomegaly  and  esophageal  varices.  During  physical examination  it  is  observed  that  the  patient  is  icteric (jaundiced)  and  dilated  veins  (“caput  medusae”)  are seen on his anterior abdominal wall. Which of the following  venous  structures  is  most  likely  obstructed  for the development of caput medusae?   A.  Portal vein   B.  Inferior vena cava   C.  Superior vena cava   D.  Lateral thoracic vein   E.  Superficial epigastric vein	A.  Portal vein
A  58-year-old  man  was  admitted  to  the  hospital with  complaints  of  pain  in  the  right  upper  quadrant and  jaundice.  Ultrasound  examination  reveals  numer- ous  large  gallstones  in  his  gallbladder.  Which  of the  following  nerves  would  transmit  the  pain  of cholecystitis?    A.  The right vagus nerve, with referral to the inferior angle of the scapula   B.  Afferent fibers in spinal nerves T1 to T4       C.  Visceral afferent fibers in the greater thoracic splanchnic nerve, with referral to the dermatomes from T6 to T8   D.  Sympathetic T10 to T12 portions of greater thoracic splanchnic nerve via celiac ganglion and celiac plexus   E.  Afferent fibers of dorsal primary rami of spinal nerves T6 to T8, with referral to the epigastric region	C.  Visceral afferent fibers in the greater thoracic splanchnic nerve, with referral to the dermatomes from T6 to T8
A  15-year-old  woman  is  brought  to  the  hospital with  fever,  nausea,  and  diffuse  paraumbilical  pain, which later becomes localized in the lower right quadrant.  An  appendectomy  procedure  is  begun  with  an incision  at  McBurney’s  point.  Which  of  the  following landmarks best describes McBurney’s point?   A.  The midpoint of the inguinal ligament in line with the right nipple   B.  Two thirds of the distance from the umbilicus to the anterior superior iliac spine   C.  A line that intersects the upper one third of the inguinal ligament   D.  A line that intersects the lower third of the inguinal ligament, about 2 cm from the pubic tubercle   E.  One third of the distance from the anterior inferior iliac spine to the umbilicus	B.  Two thirds of the distance from the umbilicus to the anterior superior iliac spine
A  41-year-old  woman  is  admitted  to  the  hospital with  upper  abdominal  pain.  A  gastroscopic  examination  reveals  multiple  small  ulcerations  in  the  body  of the  stomach.  Which  of  the  following  nerves  transmits the sensation of pain from this region?   A.  Spinal nerves T5 to T12   B.  Greater thoracic splanchnic nerves   C.  Lesser thoracic splanchnic nerves   D.  Lumbar splanchnic nerves   E.  Spinal nerves T12 to L2	B.  Greater thoracic splanchnic nerves
A 68-year-old woman is admitted to the hospital with severe pain radiating from her lower back toward her  pubic  symphysis.  Ultrasound  examination  reveals that a renal calculus (kidney stone) is partially obstructing her right ureter. At which of the following locations is the calculus most likely to lodge?   A.  Major calyx   B.  Minor calyx   C.  Pelvic brim    D.  Midportion of the ureter    E.  Between the pelvic brim and the uterine cervix	C.  Pelvic brim
A 42-year-old woman is admitted to the hospital after a traumatic landing while skydiving. Radiographic examination  reveals  a  ruptured  spleen.  An  emergency splenectomy is performed. Which of the following peritoneal  structures  must  be  carefully  manipulated  to prevent intraperitoneal bleeding?   A.  Coronary ligament   B.  Gastrocolic ligament   C.  Splenorenal ligament   D.  Phrenocolic ligament   E.  Falciform ligament	C.  Splenorenal ligament
A 74-year-old woman is admitted to the hospital with complaints of abdominal pain. Radiologic examination  reveals  diverticulosis  and  diverticulitis  of  the lower  portion  of  the  descending  colon,  with  diffuse ulcerations.  It  is  determined  that  the  involved  area  of the bowel should be removed. If the patient’s anatomy follows  the  most  typical  patterns,  which  vessels  and nerves will be cut during the operation?   A.  Branches of the vagus nerve and middle colic artery   B.  Superior mesenteric plexus and superior rectal artery   C.  Branches of pelvic splanchnic nerves and left colic artery   D.  Branches of vagus nerve and ileocolic artery     E.  Left lesser thoracic splanchnic nerve and inferior mesenteric artery	C.  Branches of pelvic splanchnic nerves and left colic artery
A  15-year-old  boy  underwent  an  appendectomy. Two  weeks  postoperatively  the  patient  complains  of numbness of the skin over the pubic region and anterior  portion  of  his  genitals.  Which  of  the  following nerves was most likely iatrogenically injured during the operation?   A.  Pudendal   B.  Genitofemoral   C.  Spinal nerve T10   D.  Subcostal   E.  Ilioinguinal	E.  Ilioinguinal
A 5-year-old boy is admitted to the hospital with failure  to  thrive,  dysphagia,  and  history  of  recurrent chest  infections.  Two  days  later  the  boy  develops aspiration  pneumonia.  Esophagographic  examination shows  webs  and  strictures  in  the  distal  third  of  the thoracic  esophagus.  Which  of  the  following  developmental  conditions  will  most  likely  explain  the symptoms?   A.  Incomplete recanalization of the esophagus during the eighth week   B.  Tracheoesophageal fistula    C.  Esophageal atresia    D.  Duodenal atresia    E.  Duodenal stenosis	A.  Incomplete recanalization of the esophagus during the eighth week
The  vomitus  of  a  5-day-old  infant  contains stomach contents and bile. The vomiting has continued for  2  days.  Radiographic  examinations  reveal  stenosis of  the  fourth  part  of  the  duodenum.  The  child  cries almost  constantly,  appearing  to  be  hungry  all  of  the time,  yet  does  not  gain  any  weight.  Which  of  the  following  developmental  conditions  will  most  likely explain the symptoms?   A.  Patent bile duct   B.  Duodenal stenosis   C.  Hypertrophied pyloric sphincter   D.  Atrophied gastric antrum   E.  Tracheoesophageal fistula	B.  Duodenal stenosis
A 4-day-old male infant vomits the contents of his stomach,  but  the  vomitus  does  not  appear  to  contain bile.  The  baby  is  obviously  distressed  and  makes sucking movements of his lips in response to offerings to suckle by his mother or of the bottle, but he is failing to  thrive.  Which  of  the  following  conditions  will  best explain the symptoms?   A.  Duodenal stenosis   B.  Duodenal atresia   C.  Hypertrophied pyloric sphincter   D.  Atrophied gastric fundus   E.  Tracheoesophageal fistula	C.  Hypertrophied pyloric sphincter
The  vomit  of  a  5-day-old  female  infant  contains stomach contents and bile. The vomiting continues for 2  days.  Radiologic  examinations  reveal  stenosis  of  the third part of the duodenum. The child cries consistently and  is  constantly  hungry,  but  she  does  not  gain  any weight.  Which  of  the  following  conditions  will  most likely explain her symptoms?   A.  Incomplete recanalization of the esophagus during the eighth week   B.  Incomplete recanalization of the duodenum    C.  Esophageal atresia    D.  Duodenal atresia    E.  Tracheoesophageal fistula	B.  Incomplete recanalization of the duodenum
A  2-hour-old  male  infant  had  been  diagnosed  in utero  with  polyhydramnios.  Now  he  is  vomiting stomach contents and bile. The vomiting continues for 2  days.  Radiographic  examination  reveals  a  “double bubble”  sign  on  the  ultrasound  scan.  The  child  cries consistently and is constantly hungry but has lost 300 g in weight. Which of the following conditions will most likely explain the symptoms?   A.  Duodenal stenosis   B.  Duodenal atresia   C.  Hypertrophied pyloric sphincter   D.  Atrophied gastric antrum   E.  Tracheoesophageal fistula	B.  Duodenal atresia
A 4-year-old male child is admitted to the hospital with  severe  vomiting.  Radiologic  examination  and history  taking  reveal  that  the  boy  suffers  from  an annular  pancreas.  Which  of  the  following  conditions will most typically explain the symptoms?   A.  The main pancreatic duct persisted as an accessory duct that opened at the minor papilla.   B.  Bile ducts failed to canalize.    C.  The bifid ventral bud fused with the dorsal bud.   D.  Only the dorsal pancreatic bud formed a ring of pancreatic tissue.   E.  Dorsal pancreatic bud developed around the third part of the duodenum.	C.  The bifid ventral bud fused with the dorsal bud.
The  surgeon  decided  that  a  35-year-old  male patient must undergo an emergency appendectomy due to  rupture  of  his  appendix.  A  midline  incision  was made  for  greater  access  to  the  peritoneal  cavity.  The surgeon  noted  a  5-cm-long  fingerlike  pouch  on  the anterior  border  of  the  ileum  about  60 cm  away  from the  ileocecal  junction.  Such  a  pouch  is  a  remnant  of which of the following developmental structures?   A.  Omphaloenteric duct (yolk stalk)   B.  Branch of superior mesenteric artery   C.  Umbilical vesicle (yolk sac)   D.  Cecal diverticulum   E.  Umbilical cord	A.  Omphaloenteric duct (yolk stalk)
A  3-month-old  boy  is  admitted  to  the  hospital with  an  abnormal  mass  of  tissue  protruding  from  his abdomen.  An  MRI  examination  reveals  that  the  mass contains some greater omentum and some small intes- tine.  The  abnormal  mass  protrudes  when  the  infant cries, strains, and coughs. Which of the following conditions will most likely explain the symptoms?    A.  Umbilical hernia    B.  Omphalocele    C.  Gastroschisis    D.  Epigastric hernia    E.  Indirect inguinal hernia	A.  Umbilical hernia
Ultrasound  examinations  of  a  male  fetus  in  the seventh  month  of  gestation  indicate  a  defect  on  his right  side,  lateral  to  the  median  plane,  in  which  the viscera protrude into the amniotic cavity. Which of the following  conditions  will  most  likely  explain  these findings?   A.  Nonrotation of the midgut   B.  Patent urachus   C.  Abdominal contents have not returned from the umbilical cord   D.  Incomplete closure of the lateral folds         E.  Persistent cloacal membrane	D.  Incomplete closure of the lateral folds
A  2-hour-old  male  infant  vomits  stomach  contents  and  bile.  The  vomiting  continues  for  2  days.  In addition,  abdominal  distension  is  noted,  and  he  is unable to pass meconium (the earliest feces to be eliminated  after  birth).  Which  of  the  following  is  the  most common cause of this condition?   A.  Infarction of fetal bowel due to volvulus   B.  Incomplete closure of the lateral folds   C.  Failure of recanalization of the ileum   D.  Remnant of the proximal portion of the omphaloenteric duct    E.  Nonrotation of the midgut	A.  Infarction of fetal bowel due to volvulus
A 5-year-old male infant is admitted to the hospi- tal  with  signs  of  appendicitis.  An  operation  is  performed  and  an  ileal  (Meckel’s)  diverticulum  is discovered. Which of the following is the most common cause of this condition?   A.  Infarction of fetal bowel due to volvulus   B.  Incomplete closure of the lateral folds   C.  Failure of recanalization of the ileum   D.  Remnant of the proximal portion of the omphaloenteric duct     E.  Nonrotation of the midgut	D.  Remnant of the proximal portion of the omphaloenteric duct
A  newborn  male  infant  has  no  passage  of  first stool  (meconium)  for  48  hours  after  birth.  Physical examination  reveals  that  the  young  patient  has  anal agenesis with a perineal fistula. Which of the following is the most common cause of this condition?   A.  Incomplete separation of the cloaca by the urorectal septum    B.  Dorsal deviation of the urorectal septum     C.  Failure of the anal membrane to perforate    D.  Abnormal recanalization of the colon    E.  Remnant of the proximal portion of the omphaloenteric duct	A.  Incomplete separation of the cloaca by the urorectal septum
A  3-month-old  female  infant  is  diagnosed  with anal stenosis after several periods of stool infrequency, two  of  which  lasted  10  days  without  a  bowel  movement. Which  of  the  following  is  the most  likely  cause of this condition?   A.  Incomplete separation of the cloaca by the urorectal septum   B.  Dorsal deviation of the urorectal septum     C.  Failure of the anal membrane to perforate    D.  Abnormal recanalization of the colon    E.  Remnant of the proximal portion of the omphaloenteric duct	B.  Dorsal deviation of the urorectal septum
A  2-month-old  male  infant  presents  with  a  fecal discharge  from  his  umbilicus.  Which  of  the  following diagnoses will best explain this condition?   A.  Enterocystoma   B.  Vitelline cyst   C.  Ileal (Meckel’s) diverticulum   D.  Vitelline fistula   E.  Volvulus	D.  Vitelline fistula
A 5-day-old male infant is diagnosed with anorectal  agenesis.  An  ultrasound  study  reveals  a  rectourethral fistula. Which of the following is the most likely embryologic cause of this condition?   A.  Failure of the proctodeum to develop   B.  Agenesis of the urorectal septum   C.  Failure of fixation of the hindgut   D.  Abnormal partitioning of the cloaca   E.  Premature rupture of the anal membrane	D.  Abnormal partitioning of the cloaca
A  12-year-old  boy  was  admitted  to  the  hospital with  massive  rectal  bleeding.  Upon  inspection,  the color of the blood ranged from bright to dark red. The child  appeared  to  be  free  of  any  pain.  Radiographic examination revealed an ileal (Meckel’s) diverticulum. Which  of  the  following  is  the  underlying  embryologic cause of this condition?   A.  Failure of yolk stalk to regress   B.  Duplication of the intestine   C.  Malrotation of the cecum and appendix   D.  Nonrotation of the midgut   E.  Herniation of the intestines	A.  Failure of yolk stalk to regress
A  23-year-old  pregnant  woman  visits  her  gynecologist for her routine ultrasound checkup. Ultrasound of the fetus reveals unilateral renal agenesis and oligohydramnios.  Which  of  the  following  conditions  most likely occurred?   A.  Polycystic kidney disease   B.  Degeneration of the mesonephros   C.  Ureteric duplication   D.  Failure of a ureteric bud to form   E.  Wilms tumor	D.  Failure of a ureteric bud to form
A  15-year-old  girl  was  admitted  to  the  hospital with  bilateral  inguinal  masses.  Physical  examination revealed  that  she  had  not  begun  to  menstruate  but showed  normal  breast  development  for  her  age.  Her external genitalia were female, the vagina was shallow, but no uterus could be palpated. Laboratory examination  revealed  that  her  sex  chromatin  pattern  was negative.  Which  of  the  following  is  the  most  likely diagnosis?   A.  Male pseudohermaphroditism   B.  Female pseudohermaphroditism   C.  Androgen insensitivity syndrome   D.  Inguinal hernias   E.  Turner syndrome	C.  Androgen insensitivity syndrome
An 18-year-old female gymnast is admitted to the hospital with pelvic pain. Physical examination reveals that  the  patient  has  a  history  of  primary  amenorrhea and  an  imperforate  hymen.  Which  of  the  following  is the most likely explanation for this condition?   A.  Failure of the vaginal plate to canalize   B.  Cervical atresia   C.  Patent processus vaginalis   D.  Androgen insensitivity syndrome   E.  Failure of the sinovaginal bulbs to develop	A.  Failure of the vaginal plate to canalize
During  a  routine  gynecologic  visit,  a  22-year-old woman complains of having dyspareunia (pain during sexual  intercourse).  During  a  pelvic  examination  a mass  of  tissue  is  detected  on  the  lateral  wall  of  the vagina.  An  ultrasound  examination  reveals  that  the abnormal structure is a Gartner duct cyst. From which of  the  following  embryonic  structures  does  this  cyst take origin?   A.  Mesonephric tubules   B.  Paramesonephric duct   C.  Urogenital folds   D.  Mesonephric duct   E.  Sinovaginal bulbs	D.  Mesonephric duct
A  2-day-old  male  infant  is  hospitalized  in  the intensive care unit with acute respiratory distress. The patient is found to have anuria, oligohydramnios, and hypoplastic  lungs.  Facial  characteristics  are  consistent with  Potter  syndrome.  Which  of  the  following  is  the most likely explanation for these initial findings?   A.  Multicystic dysplastic kidney   B.  Polycystic kidney   C.  Renal agenesis   D.  Wilms tumor   E.  Extrophy of the bladder	C.  Renal agenesis
A  58-year-old  male  bricklayer  is  admitted  to  the hospital  with  severe  pain  that  radiates  from  his  lower back  to  the  pubic  region.  Ultrasound  examination reveals  that  a  kidney  stone  is  partially  obstructing  his right  ureter;  the  examination  also  indicates  the  presence of a second ureter on the right side. Which of the following is the most likely cause of this latter finding?   A.  Failure of ureteric bud to form   B.  Early splitting of the ureteric bud   C.  Failure of urorectal septum to develop   D.  Persistent urachus   E.  Failure of ureteric bud to branch	B.  Early splitting of the ureteric bud
A 50-year-old woman with a long history of heart-burn  (self-treated  with  various  over-the-counter  medications) develops severe epigastric pain and is urgently admitted  to  the  hospital.  A  gastroscopic  examination reveals  a  small,  perforated  ulceration  in  the  posterior wall of the stomach body. At surgery, with the patient in the supine position, 150 mL of blood-tinged, frothy gray  liquid  is  aspirated  from  the  peritoneal  cavity. Where in the peritoneal cavity would liquid most likely first collect when the patient is supine?   A.  Right subphrenic space   B.  Hepatorenal pouch (of Morison)   C.  Left paracolic gutter   D.  Vesicouterine pouch   E.  Rectouterine pouch (of Douglas)	B.  Hepatorenal pouch (of Morison)
A  43-year-old  female  accountant  complains  of severe  epigastric  pain  and  is  admitted  to  the  hospital. A gastroscopic examination reveals a small, perforated ulceration in the posterior wall of the greater curvature of her stomach. An upright chest radiograph reveals a small amount of free air in the peritoneal cavity. Where is the air most likely located?   A.  Right subphrenic space   B.  Supravesical space   C.  Paracolic gutters    D.  Vesicouterine pouch    E.  Rectouterine pouch (of Douglas)	A.  Right subphrenic space
A 25-year-old woman is admitted to the hospital with  sharp  pain  in  the  left  lower  quadrant.  Patient history  reveals  that  her  last  menstrual  period  was  10 days  ago.  Transvaginal  ultrasound  reveals  a  ruptured cyst  on  the  left  ovary.  The  sonogram  also  reveals approximately  100 mL  of  fluid  in  the  pelvis,  which  is presumed to represent cyst contents and bleeding from the rupture site. Where is this fluid most likely located?   A.  Right subphrenic space   B.  Hepatorenal pouch (of Morison)   C.  Paracolic gutters   D.  Vesicouterine pouch   E.  Rectouterine pouch (of Douglas)	E.  Rectouterine pouch (of Douglas)
A  60-year-old  man  is  admitted  to  the  emergency department  with  severe  abdominal  pain.  Physical examination reveals guarding and rigidity in the abdominal wall. An abdominal CT scan shows a thrombus in an intestinal artery supplying the ileum. Which of the following layers of peritoneum will have to be entered by the surgeon to access the affected vessel?   A.  Parietal peritoneum and the greater omentum   B.  Greater and lesser omentum   C.  Lesser omentum and the gastrosplenic ligament   D.  Parietal peritoneum and the mesentery       E.  Greater omentum and the transverse mesocolon	D.  Parietal peritoneum and the mesentery
A  52-year-old  man  presents  to  the  emergency department  complaining  of  persistent  severe  right upper quadrant pain for the past 2 hours. During that period  of  time  he  felt  nauseated,  was  sweating  profusely, and also experienced pain in the posterior aspect of  his  right  shoulder.  The  pain  began  shortly  after  a lunch  consisting  of  “fast  food.”  Ultrasound  examination reveals multiple stones in an inflamed gallbladder with a normal bile duct. Which of the following spinal nerve segments are involved in the shoulder pain, asso- ciated with cholecystitis?   A.  C3 to C5   B.  C5 to C8   C.  T1 to T4   D.  T5 to T9   E.  T10, T11	D.  T5 to T9
During  a  cholecystectomy  on  a  64-year-old woman,  the  right  hepatic  artery  was  accidentally injured. In addition to bleeding profusely, the lacerated artery  was  hidden  from  view  by  overlying  connective tissue and fat plus pooling blood. Which of the following procedures would most likely be performed by the surgeon to slow, or perhaps arrest, the blood loss?   A.  Pringle maneuver   B.  Kocher maneuver   C.  Valsalva maneuver   D.  Heimlich maneuver   E.  Placement of a vascular clamp on the porta hepatis	A.  Pringle maneuver
A 53-year-old quality control engineer is admitted to  the  hospital  with  severe  abdominal  pain.  The patient’s  history  and  physical  examination  indicate chronic  colonic  diverticulitis,  with  tachycardia  and hypotension  at  the  present  time.  An  ultrasonographic examination reveals massive bleeding from the descending colon. Which of the following arteries is most likely to be the source of the hemorrhage?   A.  Branch of the inferior mesenteric   B.  Middle colic   C.  Superior rectal   D.  Inferior rectal   E.  Left gastroepiploic	A.  Branch of the inferior mesenteric
The gallbladder of a 51-year-old female patient is characterized  by  the  presence  of  multiple  gallstones, consistent with the diagnosis of cholecystitis. Which of the following tests would be anticipated to be positive in this patient?   A.  Rebound tenderness   B.  Iliopsoas test   C.  Obturator sign   D.  Murphy’s sign   E.  Cough tenderness	D.  Murphy’s sign
A 35-year-old man is admitted to the hospital with a small-caliber bullet wound to the left upper quadrant of  the  abdomen.  Radiographic  examination  reveals profuse  intraperitoneal  bleeding.  An  emergency  laparotomy is performed, and the source of bleeding appears to  be  a  vessel  within  the  lesser  sac.  Which  of  the  following  ligaments  would  most  likely  be  transected  to gain adequate entry to the lesser sac?   A.  Coronary   B.  Gastrosplenic   C.  Splenorenal   D.  Gastrocolic   E.  Hepatoduodenal	D.  Gastrocolic
A 45-year-old woman is admitted to the hospital with rectal bleeding. Physical examination, including a rectal examination, reveals an abnormal mass of tissue protruding below the pectinate line. Biopsy reveals the presence  of  an  adenocarcinoma.  Which  of  the  following  groups  of  lymph  nodes  would  first  receive  lymph from the area of pathology?   A.  Internal iliac   B.  External iliac   C.  Middle rectal   D.  Superficial inguinal   E.  Deep inguinal	D.  Superficial inguinal
A 53-year-old man is admitted to the hospital with rectal bleeding. Physical examination, including a rectal examination,  reveals  an  abnormal  mass  of  tissue  protruding  from  an  area  superior  to  the  external  anal sphincter, superior to the pectinate line. Biopsy reveals the presence of an adenocarcinoma. Which of the following  groups  of  lymph  nodes  would  first  receive lymph from the cancerous area?   A.  Internal iliac   B.  External iliac   C.  Middle rectal   D.  Superficial inguinal   E.  Deep inguinal	A.  Internal iliac
A  32-year-old  man  is  admitted  to  the  emergency department  with  severe  esophageal  reflux.  Radiographic  examination  reveals  that  the  patient  has  a hiatal  hernia,  and  a  surgical  procedure  is  scheduled. Which  of  the  following  landmarks  would  be  the  most useful  to  distinguish  between  sliding  and  paraesophageal hiatal hernias?   A.  Sliding hernias possess a normal gastroesophageal junction.   B.  In sliding hernias the gastroesophageal junction is displaced.   C.  Paraesophageal hernias have a displaced gastroesophageal junction.   D.  In paraesophageal hernias the antrum moves into the stomach corpus.   E.  In paraesophageal hernias the antrum and the cardia move into the body of the stomach.	B.  In sliding hernias the gastroesophageal junction is displaced.
A  43-year-old  man  is  admitted  to  the  emergency department with complaints of intense abdominal pain. Radiographic  examination  reveals  a  right  subphrenic abscess  that  extends  to  the  midline.  Which  of  the  following structures would most likely be in a position to retard the spread of the abscess across the midline?   A.  Round ligament    B.  Falciform ligament    C.  Coronary ligament    D.  Hepatoduodenal ligament    E.  Gastroduodenal ligament	B.  Falciform ligament
A  21-year-old  male  football  player  is  admitted  to the  emergency  department  with  intense  back  pain. Physical examination shows that his left lower back is bruised and swollen. He complains of sharp pain during respiration. A radiograph reveals a fracture of the eleventh rib on the left side. Which of the following organs would be the most likely to sustain injury at this site?   A.  Spleen   B.  Lung   C.  Kidney   D.  Liver   E.  Pancreas	A.  Spleen
A 46-year-old man is admitted to the hospital with a  rather  large  but  painless  mass  on  his  right  groin. During physical examination it is noted that the inguinal lymph nodes are hard and palpable. A lymph node biopsy  reveals  the  presence  of  malignant  cells.  Which of  the  following  locations  would  be  the  most  likely primary source of carcinoma?   A.  Prostate   B.  Bladder   C.  Testis   D.  Anal canal   E.  Sigmoid colon	D.  Anal canal
A 54-year-old man is admitted to the hospital with vomiting and severe weight loss. Physical examination reveals  that  the  umbilical  and  epigastric  regions  are tender  and  painful.  A  CT  scan  examination  reveals  a massive  tumor  originating  from  the  third  part  of  the duodenum.  Which  of  the  following  structures  is  most likely to be compressed or invaded by the tumor?   A.  Common bile duct   B.  Portal vein   C.  Superior mesenteric artery   D.  Gastroduodenal artery   E.  Posterior superior pancreaticoduodenal artery	C.  Superior mesenteric artery
A 24-year-old woman is admitted to the hospital with lower abdominal pain. A CT examination reveals an  abnormal  mass  occupying  the  left  adnexa  in  the pelvis.  During  the  surgical  procedure  the  ureter  and the  structures  immediately  medial  to  the  ureter  are identified.  Which  of  the  following  vascular  structures crosses the ureter just lateral to the cervix of the uterus?   A.  Middle rectal artery   B.  Superior vesical artery   C.  Internal pudendal vein   D.  Uterine artery   E.  Gonadal vein	D.  Uterine artery
A 32-year-old woman is admitted to the hospital with  cramping  abdominal  pain  around  her  umbilicus and vomiting for the previous 2 days. Radiologic studies indicate  numerous  stones  in  the  gallbladder  and  air accumulation  in  the  gallbladder  and  biliary  tree.  At which of the following places will an obstructive stone most likely be found?   A.  Jejunum   B.  Terminal ileum   C.  Common bile duct   D.  Duodenum   E.  Hepatic duct	B.  Terminal ileum
A 37-year-old woman is admitted to the hospital with signs of cholecystitis. A physical examination confirms  the  initial  diagnosis  and  a  cholecystectomy  is planned.  Which  of  the  following  landmarks  will  best describe  the  precise  location  of  the  gallbladder  with respect to the body wall?   A.  The intersection of the right linea semilunaris with the ninth costal cartilage   B.  The intersection of the right linea semilunaris with the intertubercular plane    C.  To the right of the epigastric region    D.  Superiorly to the umbilical region   E.  Upper right quadrant	A.  The intersection of the right linea semilunaris with the ninth costal cartilage
A 45-year-old man is admitted to the hospital with a  palpable  and  painful  mass  at  his  groin  that  is  exacerbated  when  he  stands  erect  or  physically  exerts himself. Physical examination indicates the probability of a direct inguinal hernia, a diagnosis that is confirmed laparoscopically.  Which  of  the  following  is  the  most likely cause of this type of inguinal hernia?   A.  Defective transversalis fascia around the deep inguinal ring   B.  Defective peritoneum around the deep inguinal ring   C.  Defective aponeurosis of external abdominal oblique muscle   D.  Defective extraperitoneal connective tissue    E.  Defective aponeurosis of transversus abdominis muscle	E.  Defective aponeurosis of transversus abdominis muscle
A 22-year-old woman is admitted to the hospital with a complaint of intense periumbilical pain. Physical examination  indicates  a  strong  possibility  of  appendi- citis.  Shortly  before  an  appendectomy  is  to  be  performed, the inflamed appendix ruptures. In which area would  the  extravasating  blood  and  infectious  fluids from the appendiceal region most tend to collect if the patient was sitting upright?   A.  Subphrenic space   B.  Hepatorenal recess (pouch of Morison)   C.  Rectouterine recess (pouch of Douglas)   D.  Vesicouterine space   E.  Subhepatic space	C.  Rectouterine recess (pouch of Douglas)
A 22-year-old woman complains of severe pain in the epigastric region. A CT scan reveals that the source of the pain is an inflamed appendix. Which of the following  structures  contain  the  nerve  cell  bodies  from the  appendix  that  are  causing  the  referred  pain  in  the epigastrium?   A.  Sympathetic trunk ganglia   B.  Celiac ganglion   C.  Lateral horn of the spinal cord   D.  Dorsal root ganglia of spinal nerves T8 to T10   E.  Dorsal root ganglia of spinal nerves L2 to L4	D.  Dorsal root ganglia of spinal nerves T8 to T10
A  30-year-old  woman  complains  of  weakness and  fatigability  over  the  past  6  months.  She  has  a 3-month acute history of severe hypertension that has required  treatment  with  antihypertensive medications. Radiographic examination reveals a tumor of her right suprarenal gland. The patient is diagnosed with a pheochromocytoma  (tumor  of  the  adrenal  medulla)  and  is scheduled for a laparoscopic adrenalectomy. Which of the following nerve fibers will need to be cut when the adrenal gland and tumor are removed?   A.  Preganglionic sympathetic fibers   B.  Postganglionic sympathetic fibers   C.  Somatic motor fibers   D.  Postganglionic parasympathetic fibers   E.  Preganglionic parasympathetic fibers	A.  Preganglionic sympathetic fibers
A 55-year-old man is admitted to the hospital for his annual checkup. An ultrasound examination reveals a  tumor  that  has  incorporated  the  right  common  iliac artery and compressed the vein that lies posterior to it. Doppler ultrasound studies give evidence of the devel- opment of a deep venous thrombosis that could block venous  return  from  the  left  lower  limb,  causing  ischemia and pain. Which of the following vessels is most likely  to  be  involved  in  the  production  of  the  deep venous thrombosis?    A.  Inferior vena cava    B.  Right renal vein    C.  Left testicular vein    D.  Left common iliac vein    E.  Right common iliac vein	D.  Left common iliac vein
A  48-year-old  woman  is  admitted  to  the  emergency department with a complaint of severe abdominal  pain.  Radiographic  examination  reveals  advanced carcinoma of the head of the pancreas. A celiac plexus block  is  performed  to  relieve  her  pain.  Which  of  the following  best  describes  the  nerve  structures  that  are most likely to be present in the celiac ganglion?   A.  Preganglionic parasympathetic and somatic motor fibers   B.  Postganglionic parasympathetic and visceral afferent fibers   C.  Postganglionic sympathetic and visceral afferent fibers   D.  Pre- and postganglionic sympathetic, preganglionic parasympathetic, and visceral afferent fibers   E.  Preganglionic sympathetic, preganglionic parasympathetic, and visceral afferent fibers	D.  Pre- and postganglionic sympathetic, preganglionic parasympathetic, and visceral afferent fibers
A  21-year-old  woman  is  admitted  to  the  hospital with  a  complaint  of  severe  pain  radiating  from  her lower  back  toward  and  above  the  pubic  symphysis. Ultrasound  examination  reveals  that  a  kidney  stone  is partially obstructing her right ureter. Which of the following nerves is most likely responsible for conducting the sensation of pain?   A.  Subcostal   B.  Iliohypogastric   C.  Ilioinguinal   D.  Lateral femoral cutaneous   E.  Obturator	C.  Ilioinguinal
A 42-year-old woman is admitted to the hospital with  an  acutely  painful  abdomen  and  vomiting  bright red  blood.  Radiographic  examination  reveals  penetra- tion of a posterior duodenal ulcer resulting in intraabdominal  bleeding.  Which  of  the  following  arteries  is most commonly eroded by this type of ulcer?   A.  Gastroduodenal artery   B.  Superior mesenteric   C.  Posterior superior pancreaticoduodenal   D.  Posterior inferior pancreaticoduodenal   E.  Right gastric	C.  Posterior superior pancreaticoduodenal
A 37-year-old female court stenographer is admit- ted to the hospital with a complaint of intense pain in her abdomen. Radiologic examination reveals penetra- tion of an anterior duodenal ulcer. Which of the following conditions will most probably occur?   A.  Bleeding from gastroduodenal artery   B.  Bleeding from superior mesenteric artery   C.  Bleeding from posterior superior pancreaticoduodenal artery    D.  Bleeding from posterior inferior pancreaticoduodenal artery   E.  Peritonitis	E.  Peritonitis
A 56-year-old man is diagnosed with midgut volvulus  and  intestinal  ischemia.  A  laparotomy  is  performed  to  release  the  obstruction  of  the  intestines. Which  of  the  following  structures  is  used  as  a  landmark  to  determine  the  position  of  the  duodenojejunal junction?   A.  Superior mesenteric artery   B.  Inferior mesenteric artery   C.  Vasa recta   D.  Suspensory ligament of the duodenum (ligament of Treitz)   E.  Phrenocolic ligament	D.  Suspensory ligament of the duodenum (ligament of Treitz)
A  4-month-old  female  infant  is  admitted  to  the hospital  with  cyanosis.  Physical  examination  reveals decreased  breath  sounds,  abdominal  sounds  in  the thorax, and respiratory distress. A radiographic examination reveals a posterolateral defect of the diaphragm and abdominal contents in the left pleural cavity. Which of the following is the most likely cause of this defect?   A.  Absence of a pleuropericardial fold   B.  Absence of musculature in one half of the diaphragm   C.  Failure of migration of diaphragm    D.  Failure of the septum transversum to develop    E.  Failure of pleuroperitoneal fold to close	E.  Failure of pleuroperitoneal fold to close
A 58-year-old man complains of sharp epigastric pain, most commonly felt just after a large meal. He is tender to palpation at the xiphisternal junction. Barium swallow exams and dye injections (HIDA scan) to test gallbladder  functions  are  negative.  Ultrasound  reveals that a portion of the greater omentum is trapped at its entry  to  the  thorax  between  the  xiphoid  process  and the costal margin on the right. What is the most likely diagnosis of this condition?   A.  Bochdalek hernia   B.  Sliding esophageal hernia    C.  Morgagni hernia    D.  Cholecystitis    E.  Hiatal hernia	C.  Morgagni hernia
A  62-year-old  woman  is  admitted  to  the  emergency  department  with  abdominal  pains  of  uncertain origin. A CT scan reveals an aortic aneurysm affecting the  origin  of  the  superior  mesenteric  artery,  resulting in  ischemia  to  an  abdominal  organ.  Which  of  the  following organs is most likely affected?   A.  Ileum   B.  Transverse colon   C.  Spleen   D.  Stomach   E.  Duodenum	A.  Ileum
A 41-year-old man entered the emergency department with abdominal trauma after his motorcycle was struck  by  a  hit-and-run  automobile  driver.  One  week following  emergent  surgery  the  patient  was  released from  the  hospital.  Two  months  postoperatively  the patient  complained  of  abdominal  pain.  A  CT  scan examination demonstrated an internal hernia in which the hepatic flexure of the colon had herniated through the  epiploic  (omental)  foramen  (of  Winslow).  Gastrointestinal  veins  appeared  to  be  markedly  dilated, including  the  veins  forming  anastomoses  between  the portal  and  caval  systems  (veins  of  Retzius).  Which  of the following structures is most likely compressed?   A.  Portal vein   B.  Inferior vena cava   C.  Hepatic artery   D.  Common bile duct   E.  Cystic duct	A.  Portal vein
A 48-year-old woman visited the outpatient clinic with  a  complaint  of  lower  left  quadrant  pain  that  had persisted for the previous 3 months. Laboratory exami- nations  revealed  that  the  patient  had  blood  in  her stools.  A  colonoscopy  gave  evidence  of  diverticulosis that had been affecting the distal part of the descending colon.  To  which  of  the  following  dermatomes  would pain have most likely been referred?   A.  T5 to T9   B.  T10 to L1   C.  L1, L2   D.  L1 to L4   E.  T10 to L2	C.  L1, L2
A  61-year-old  man  is  admitted  to  the  emergency department  with  abdominal  pain  and  a  2-day  history of  vomiting.  Physical  examination  reveals  a  colicky abdominal  pain  in  the  right  lower  quadrant,  with abdominal  distention.  Upon  auscultation,  episodes  of pain  were  associated  with  rushes,  gurgling,  and  tinkling sounds. A CT scan examination reveals a mechanical  obstruction  of  the  bowel.  Which  of  the  following parts  of  the  gastrointestinal  tract  is  most  likely obstructed?   A.  Hepatopancreatic ampulla of Vater   B.  Duodenal bulb   C.  Proximal ileum   D.  Pyloric sphincter   E.  Ileocecal junction	E.  Ileocecal junction
A 43-year-old woman is admitted to the emergency department  with  esophageal  pain  and  hematemesis after swallowing a fish bone. An endoscopic examination reveals perforation of the intraabdominal portion of the esophageal wall. Which of the following arteries is most likely injured?   A.  Branches of left gastric   B.  Bronchial   C.  Thoracic intercostal   D.  Branches of right gastric   E.  Right inferior phrenic	A.  Branches of left gastric
A  42-year-old  patient  is  admitted  to  the  hospital after  suffering  a  ruptured  spleen  in  a  skiing  accident. Physical examination reveals intense pain that radiates to  the  region  of  the  left  shoulder,  presumably  due  to irritation  of  the  diaphragm.  Which  of  the  following signs best describes this condition?   A.  Mittelschmerz   B.  Kerh’s sign   C.  Rovsing’s sign   D.  Psoas sign   E.  Obturator sign	B.  Kerh’s sign
A 43-year-old man is admitted to the hospital with a  knife  wound  to  the  right  lobe  of  the  liver.  After  a laparotomy  is  performed,  digital  pressure  (Pringle’s maneuver) is applied to the hepatoduodenal ligament, but  brisk  bleeding  continues,  indicating  a  variation  in the origin of the right hepatic artery. Which of the following  is  the  most  common  variation  in  the  arterial supply to the right lobe of the liver?   A.  The right hepatic originates from the gastroduodenal   B.  The right hepatic originates from the superior mesenteric    C.  The right hepatic originates from the left gastric   D.  The right hepatic originates from the left hepatic   E.  The right hepatic originates directly from the aorta	B.  The right hepatic originates from the superior mesenteric
A 38-year-old woman is admitted to the hospital with  signs  of  cholecystitis  and  gallbladder  stones. During  cholangiography,  the  catheter  is  inserted  with difficulty  into  the  gallbladder.  Which  of  the  following structures  is  most  likely  to  interfere  with  the  passage of the catheter into the cystic duct?   A.  Cystic duct compression by a hepatic artery   B.  Spiral valve (of Heister)   C.  Tortuosity of the cystic duct   D.  Adhesions from the hepatoduodenal ligament   E.  Portal vein compression of the cystic duct	B.  Spiral valve (of Heister)
A 57-year-old woman is admitted to the hospital with symptoms and signs of acute cholecystitis. Radiographic  and  physical  examinations  confirm  the  initial diagnosis, and a cholecystectomy is performed. On the fifth postoperative day the patient develops bile peritonitis.  Which  of  the  following  conditions  would  most likely  be  responsible  for  such  an  outcome,  assuming the cholecystectomy had been performed correctly?   A.  The common bile duct is leaking   B.  The ducts of Luschka are leaking   C.  The right hepatic duct is leaking   D.  The cystic duct is leaking   E.  The left hepatic duct is leaking	B.  The ducts of Luschka are leaking
A 64-year-old man is admitted to the hospital with intense  abdominal  pain  from  a  pancreatic  tumor.  A neurectomy is performed to interrupt the neural fibers supplying the pancreas. Which of the following neural fibers  would  be  the  most  likely  objective  of  the neurectomy?   A.  Sympathetic preganglionic   B.  Sympathetic postganglionic   C.  Visceral afferent   D.  Preganglionic parasympathetics   E.  Postganglionic parasympathetics	C.  Visceral afferent
A  54-year-old  man  is  admitted  to  the  emergency department  with  a  2-day  history  of  mild  abdominal pain,  in  addition  to  bloating,  nausea,  vomiting,  and poor  appetite.  Past  medical  history  reveals  that  the patient has just recovered from a pneumonia infection. Radiographic  examination  reveals  a  paralytic  ileus. Which  of  the  followings  signs  would  most  likely  be found during a physical examination?   A.  Increased bowel sounds   B.  Absent bowel sounds   C.  Borborygmi   D.  Crampy abdominal pain   E.  Localized tenderness	B.  Absent bowel sounds
A  65-year-old  man  is  admitted  to  the  emergency department  with  complaints  of  nonspecific  abdominal pain.  Physical  and  radiographic  examinations  reveal mild  intestinal  ischemia  due  to  atherosclerotic  occlusion of the midproximal part of the superior mesenteric artery, but collateral blood supply has delayed the onset of  necrosis.  What  vessels  provide  collateral  channels between  the  celiac  trunk  and  the  superior  mesenteric artery?   A.  Superior and inferior pancreaticoduodenal   B.  Left gastric and hepatic   C.  Cystic and gastroduodenal   D.  Right and left colic   E.  Right and left gastro-omental	A.  Superior and inferior pancreaticoduodenal
A  22-year-old  man  is  admitted  to  the  emergency department  with  acute  abdominal  pain  at  his  right lower  quadrant.  Radiographic  and  physical  examina- tions provide evidence of acute appendicitis. An appendectomy  is  performed,  beginning  with  an  incision  at the McBurney’s point. Through which of the following abdominal  layers  must  the  surgeon  pass  to  reach  the appendix through this incision?   A.  External abdominal oblique muscle, internal oblique muscle, transversalis fascia, and parietal peritoneum   B.  Aponeurosis of the external abdominal oblique muscle, internal oblique muscle, transversus abdominis muscle, transversalis fascia, and parietal peritoneum   C.  Aponeurosis of the external abdominal oblique muscle, internal oblique muscle, transversus abdominis muscle, and parietal peritoneum   D.  Aponeurosis of the external abdominal oblique muscle, aponeurosis of internal oblique muscle, transversus abdominis muscle, transversalis fascia, and parietal peritoneum   E.  Aponeurosis of the external abdominal oblique muscle, aponeurosis of internal oblique muscle, aponeurosis of transversus abdominis muscle, transversalis fascia, and parietal peritoneum	B.  Aponeurosis of the external abdominal oblique muscle, internal oblique muscle, transversus abdominis muscle, transversalis fascia, and parietal peritoneum
A 12-year-old boy is admitted to the hospital with profuse  rectal  bleeding  but  appears  to  be  free  of  any associated  pain.  Which  of  the  following  is  the  most common cause of severe rectal bleeding in the pediatric age group?   A.  Internal hemorrhoids   B.  External hemorrhoids   C.  Diverticulosis   D.  Ileal (Meckel’s) diverticulum   E.  Borborygmi	D.  Ileal (Meckel’s) diverticulum
A  53-year-old  man  visits  the  outpatient  clinic because  of  an  abnormal  mass  developing  in  his  anal canal. An image from the physical examination is seen in Fig. 3-5. A biopsy of the tissue reveals squamous cell carcinoma  of  the  anus.  Which  of  the  following  lymph nodes  will  most  typically  first  receive  cancerous  cells from the anal tumor?    A.  Deep inguinal lymph nodes    B.  Superficial inguinal lymph nodes    C.  Internal iliac nodes    D.  External iliac nodes    E.  Para-aortic nodes	B.  Superficial inguinal lymph nodes
An  endoscopic  examination  is  performed  on  a 49-year-old  patient  with  a  preliminary  diagnosis  of  a gastrointestinal cancer, and a tissue sample is sent for histopathologic  examination.  Biopsy  reveals  a  gastric adenocarcinoma, and a total gastrectomy is performed. Which  of  the  following  lymph  nodes  will  most  likely first receive metastatic cells?   A.  Celiac   B.  Splenic   C.  Suprapancreatic   D.  Right gastric   E.  Cisterna chyli	A.  Celiac
A 3-year-old boy is admitted to the pediatric clinic with a  palpable mass in  the  right  side  of his  scrotum, and  a  preliminary  diagnosis  is  made  of  a  congenital, indirect inguinal hernia. Which of the following is the most likely cause of an indirect inguinal hernia in this patient?   A.  The deep inguinal ring opens into an intact processus vaginalis   B.  Congenital hydrocele    C.  Ectopic testis    D.  Epispadias    E.  Rupture of the transversalis fascia	A.  The deep inguinal ring opens into an intact processus vaginalis
A  43-year-old  woman  visits  the  outpatient  clinic with complaints of chronic dysphagia and gastroesoph- ageal reflux. An endoscopic examination reveals acha- lasia  of  the  cardia  of  the  stomach.  Which  of  the following is the most likely cause of this condition?   A.  Failure of relaxation of the lower esophageal sphincter   B.  Dyspepsia    C.  Gastritis    D.  Gastroparesis    E.  Peptic ulcer	A.  Failure of relaxation of the lower esophageal sphincter
A 21-year-old man is admitted to the hospital with periumbilical  pain.  A  CT  scan  examination  reveals internal bleeding about 2 feet proximal to the ileocecal junction.  Which  of  the  following  is  the  most  likely diagnosis?   A.  Ruptured appendix   B.  Volvulus   C.  Diverticulosis   D.  Ileal (Meckel’s) diverticulum   E.  Borborygmi	D.  Ileal (Meckel’s) diverticulum
A 45-year-old man is admitted to the hospital with pain in the right upper quadrant, with radiation to the tip  of  his  scapula.  Radiographic  examination  reveals gallbladder  stones,  with  associated  cholecystitis.  An open  cholecystectomy  is  performed,  using  a  Kocher incision  (along  the  right  costal  margin).  Which  of  the following  nerves  are  most  likely  at  risk  during  this incision?   A.  T5, T6   B.  T6 to T8   C.  T7, T8   D.  T9 to L1   E.  T5 to T9	C.  T7, T8
A 3-year-old girl is admitted to the pediatric clinic because  of  a  palpable  right  inguinal  mass.  An  open surgical  procedure  is  performed.  Digital  pressure  is used  to  return  organ  contents  of  the  hernia  to  the abdomen.  A  sac  of  peritoneum  can  be  seen  clearly, protruding from the internal ring. Which of the following  terms  is  most  accurate  for  the  origin  of  this structure?   A.  A patent processus vaginalis (canal of Nuck)   B.  Congenital hydrocele   C.  Ectopic uterus   D.  Femoral hernia   E.  Rupture of the transversalis fascia	A.  A patent processus vaginalis (canal of Nuck)
A  48-year-old  woman  was  scheduled  for  radiographic examination because of severe abdominal pain. The imaging gave evidence of a pancreatic pseudocyst. Which of the following is the typical topographic location for this type of pseudocyst?   A.  Right subhepatic space   B.  Hepatorenal space   C.  Omental bursa    D.  Right subphrenic space    E.  Greater sac	C.  Omental bursa
A 38-year-old man is examined in the outpatient clinic because of his complaint of mild abdominal pain of 2 years’ duration. Upon examination, it is observed that the pain is dull and located principally in the left upper quadrant around the xiphoid process. An endoscopic examination reveals that the patient suffers from a gastric ulcer. At which of the following spinal nerve levels  are  the  neuronal  cell  bodies  located  for  the sensory fibers in such a case of gastric ulcer?   A.  T5, T6   B.  T6 to T8   C.  T7, T8   D.  T9 to L1   E.  T5 to T9	C.  T7, T8
A 43-year-old man is admitted to the hospital with abdominal pain and vomiting. A CT scan examination reveals that the patient has an internal hernia involving his duodenum at the fossa of Landzert. An exploratory laparotomy  reveals  a  paraduodenal  hernia.  Which  of the following arteries  is  most at  risk during  the  repair of this hernia?   A.  Middle colic   B.  Sigmoidal   C.  Ileocolic   D.  Ileal   E.  Ascending branches of left colic	E.  Ascending branches of left colic
A  42-year-old  man  with  jaundice  is  admitted  to the hospital with severe pain that radiates to his back. A CT scan examination reveals a tumor at the neck of the  pancreas.  A  biopsy  reveals  a  ductular  adenocarci- noma.  Which  of  the  following  structures  will  first receive metastatic cells?   A.  Stomach   B.  Spleen   C.  Duodenum   D.  Liver   E.  Vertebral column	D.  Liver
A  major  vessel  appears  to  be  nearly  occluded  in a  42-year-old  male  patient  diagnosed  with  ductular adenocarcinoma.  A  CT  scan  examination  has  clearly demonstrated the tumor is at the neck of the pancreas. Which of the following vessels would be the most likely to be obstructed?   A.  Inferior mesenteric vein   B.  Portal vein    C.  Celiac trunk    D.  Posterior superior pancreaticoduodenal artery    E.  Greater pancreatic artery	B.  Portal vein
A 49-year-old woman is admitted to the hospital with  abdominal  pain.  Physical  examination  reveals epigastric pain that migrates toward the patient’s right side  and  posteriorly  toward  the  scapula.  She  is  not jaundiced. Radiologic examination reveals cholecystitis with a large gallstone and no jaundice. In which of the following structures is the gallstone most likely located?   A.  Common bile duct   B.  Hartmann’s pouch   C.  Left hepatic duct   D.  Pancreatic duct   E.  Right hepatic duct	B.  Hartmann’s pouch
A 47-year-old woman is admitted to the hospital with jaundice and epigastric pain that migrates toward the  patient’s  right  side  and  posteriorly  toward  the scapula. Radiographic examination reveals cholecystitis with  a  large  gallstone.  Which  of  the  following  is  the most likely site for a gallstone to lodge?   A.  Common bile duct   B.  Hepatopancreatic ampulla (of Vater)   C.  Left hepatic duct   D.  Pancreatic duct   E.  Right hepatic duct	B.  Hepatopancreatic ampulla (of Vater)
A  40-year-old  man  of  nine  children  agrees  with his wife to have a vasectomy. During the operation the urologist  separates  the  layers  of  the  spermatic  cord  to expose the ductus deferens so that it can be ligated and cut.  From  what  structure  is  the  internal  spermatic fascial covering derived?   A.  Internal oblique muscle   B.  Cremaster muscle   C.  External abdominal oblique muscle fascia   D.  Transversus abdominis aponeurosis   E.  Transversalis fascia	E.  Transversalis fascia
A 26-year-old woman has a nonpainful hernia in the midline of the abdominal wall, several inches above the  level  of  the  umbilicus.  Which  of  the  following hernias will most likely characterize this condition?   A.  Umbilical hernia   B.  Spigelian hernia   C.  Epigastric hernia   D.  Femoral hernia   E.  Omphalocele	C.  Epigastric hernia
A 23-year-old man suffered a knife wound to the epigastric region. At laparotomy, when the abdomen is opened  for  inspection,  it  is  seen  that  an  injury  to  the liver  occurred  between  the  bed  of  the  gallbladder  and the falciform ligament, and the wound is bleeding profusely. The Pringle maneuver is performed with a nontraumatic vascular clamp, but blood continues spurting from  the  surface  of  the  liver.  Which  part  of  the  liver and which artery is most likely injured?   A.  Lateral segment of the left lobe and the left hepatic artery   B.  Caudate segment of the liver, with injury both to right and left hepatic arteries    C.  Anterior segment of the right lobe, with injury to the right hepatic artery   D.  Medial segment of the left lobe, with injury to an aberrant left hepatic artery   E.  Quadrate lobe, with injury to the middle hepatic branch of the right hepatic artery	D.  Medial segment of the left lobe, with injury to an aberrant left hepatic artery
A  47-year-old  male  patient  had  undergone  bilateral  vagotomy,  with  division  of  both  vagus  trunks  at the  esophageal  hiatus,  to  relieve  his  chronic  difficulty with  peptic  ulcers.  Which  of  the  following  conditions will most likely occur?   A.  Parasympathetic supply to the descending colon is lost.   B.  The patient would no longer have contraction of the urinary bladder.   C.  The patient would become impotent.    D.  The patient would be sterile because of paralysis of the ductus deferens and ejaculatory duct.   E.  Parasympathetic supply to the ascending colon would be reduced or absent.	E.  Parasympathetic supply to the ascending colon would be reduced or absent.
A 35-year-old male accountant was brought to the emergency  department  with  the  complaint  of  intense abdominal pain of 1-hour duration. His abdomen was distended, rigid, did not move in respiration, and was painful to palpation. He had adynamic (paralytic) ileus resulting  from  a  peptic  ulcer,  although  there  was  very little bleeding into the peritoneal cavity. He complained that  he  had  pain  in  his  right  shoulder.  Which  of  the following conditions will most likely occur?   A.  Radiographs would not reveal the presence of air under his diaphragm.   B.  Borborygmi would be decreased in frequency and amplitude.   C.  He probably suffered from a posterior penetrating ulcer rather than from an anterior perforating ulcer.    D.  The patient’s ulcer probably occurred in the second part of the duodenum.   E.  The patient probably had acute appendicitis.	B.  Borborygmi would be decreased in frequency and amplitude.
A  68-year-old  woman  had  been  suffering  long-term  effects  of  diverticulosis  and  inflammation  of  the transverse colon. To permit operating on a patient with severe  diverticulosis  of  the  transverse  colon,  it  would be necessary to first ligate (tie off) or clamp the source of arterial supply. Which of the following arteries will most likely be ligated?   A.  Middle colic   B.  Right colic   C.  Superior mesenteric   D.  Ileocolic   E.  Left colic	A.  Middle colic
A hard mass (a fecalith) in the ostium of a 27-year- old  patient’s  appendix  had  led  to  a  local  infection (appendicitis) with a slightly elevated temperature and a  moderate  increase  in  WBC  count.  The  initial  pain from the infection was dull and difficult to localize, but the patient placed his hand in the periumbilical area to indicate  the  general  area  of  discomfort.  The  region  of the  umbilicus  receives  its  sensory  supply,  classically, from which of the following spinal nerves?   A.  T7   B.  T8   C.  T10   D.  T12   E.  L1	C.  T10
A  55-year-old  man  had  been  unsuccessfully treated for alcoholism for 3 years. He was admitted to the hospital for emergency medical treatment for severe portal hypertension. Which of the following is a feature of the development of severe portal hypertension?   A.  Esophageal varices—from increased pressure in the right gastric vein   B.  Ascites—from effusion of fluid from the inferior mesenteric vein   C.  Internal hemorrhoids—from increased pressure within the superior mesenteric vein and its tributaries   D.  Expansion of veins within the falciform ligament, which anastomose with veins of the umbilical region   E.  Recanalization and expansion of the vessels within the medial umbilical ligaments	D.  Expansion of veins within the falciform ligament, which anastomose with veins of the umbilical region
In  performing  a  laparoscopic  hernia  repair  on  a 24-year-old  female  gymnast,  the  surgical  resident observed  the  bright  reflection  provided  by  the  tissues of the iliopubic tract. The iliopubic tract could be traced medially to the site of the femoral herniation. The iliopubic  tract  is  best  characterized  by  which  of  the  following statements?   A.  The iliopubic tract represents the aponeurotic origin of the transversus abdominis.   B.  The iliopubic tract forms the lateral border of the inguinal triangle (of Hesselbach).   C.  The iliopubic tract forms the lateral border of the femoral ring.   D.  The iliopubic tract is the part of the inguinal ligament that attaches to the pectineal ligament.   E.  The iliopubic tract is the lateral extension of the pectineal ligament.	A.  The iliopubic tract represents the aponeurotic origin of the transversus abdominis.
A  47-year-old  man  had  been  scheduled  for  an appendectomy. During the open operative procedure it was  discovered  that  atypical  embryologic  rotation  of the  intestine,  adhesions,  and  adipose  tissue  made  it somewhat  difficult  to  find  the  appendix.  Most  commonly, the vermiform appendix is best located by locating and tracing which of the following?   A.  Anterior cecal artery   B.  Descending branch of the right colic artery   C.  Ileum to the ileocecal juncture   D.  Posterior cecal artery   E.  Taeniae coli of the ascending colon	E.  Taeniae coli of the ascending colon
A 5-day-old male infant presents with abdominal distention,  constipation,  and  vomiting.  A  CT  scan reveals  an  abnormally  dilated  descending  colon  and  a diagnosis  of  Hirschsprung’s  disease  (megacolon)  is made. What is the embryologic mechanism responsible for Hirschsprung’s disease?   A.  Failure of neural crest cells to migrate into the walls of the colon   B.  Incomplete separation of the cloaca    C.  Failure of recanalization of the colon    D.  Defective rotation of the hindgut    E.  Oligohydramnios	A.  Failure of neural crest cells to migrate into the walls of the colon
A  32-year-old  man  visits  his  family  physician complaining of groin pain. Examination reveals that the patient has an indirect inguinal hernia. Which nerve is most likely responsible for the pain transmission?   A.  Iliohypogastric   B.  Lateral femoral cutaneous   C.  Ilioinguinal    D.  Lumbar splanchnic    E.  Greater splanchnic	C.  Ilioinguinal
A  35-year-old  immune-compromised  woman  is suffering  from  herpes  zoster  (shingles).  She  presents with  a  severe  sharp  burning  pain  and  vesicular  eruption  on  the  skin  around  the  umbilicus.  Which  spinal nerve contributes to this dermatome?   A.  T8   B.  T9   C.  T10   D.  T11   E.  T12	C.  T10
A  68-year-old  woman  is diagnosed  with  a  poste- rior  abdominal  wall tumor  that  has invaded  the superior mesenteric plexus. Which structure will most likely be affected?   A.  Ascending colon   B.  Rectum   C.  Stomach   D.  Descending colon   E.  Kidney	A.  Ascending colon
A 35-year-old woman visits her general practitioner after an appendectomy complaining of paresthesia (numbness)  over  the  anterior  part  of  her  right  labium majus. Which nerve was most likely traumatized during the procedure?   A.  Iliohypogastric and ilioinguinal   B.  Ilioinguinal   C.  Genital branch of genitofemoral   D.  Subcostal   E.  Obturator	B.  Ilioinguinal
A  54-year-old  man  underwent  a  gastroscopy, which  revealed  a  tumor  in  the  pyloric  antrum  of  the stomach.  A  CT  scan  was  ordered  to  evaluate  lymph node  involvement.  Which  of  the  following  nodes  initially drain the pyloric antrum?   A.  Celiac   B.  Superior mesenteric   C.  Inferior mesenteric   D.  Lumbar   E.  Hepatic	A.  Celiac
A  21-year-old  football  player  is  admitted  to  the emergency department with severe back pain. A radio- graph  reveals  a  fractured  angle  of  the  eleventh  rib  on the  left  side.  Which  of  the  following  organs  is  most likely at risk for injury?   A.  Stomach   B.  Descending colon   C.  Kidney   D.  Liver   E.  Pancreas	C.  Kidney
A 32-year-old woman is admitted to the hospital for  complaints  of  upper  abdominal  pain.  A  CT  scan shows evidence of an ulcer in the posterior wall of the duodenal  cap.  Which  structure  will  most  likely  be affected if the ulcer perforates?   A.  Hepatic portal vein   B.  Superior mesenteric artery   C.  Bile duct   D.  Proper hepatic artery   E.  Gastroduodenal artery	E.  Gastroduodenal artery
A 45-year-old man is admitted to the hospital with groin  pain  and  a  palpable  mass  just  superior  to  the inguinal  ligament.  The  patient  is  diagnosed  with  a hernia  and  surgical  repair  is  performed.  During  the operation, the surgeon found a loop of intestine in the deep inguinal ring. Which type of hernia is this?   A.  Direct inguinal   B.  Umbilical   C.  Femoral   D.  Lumbar   E.  Indirect inguinal	E.  Indirect inguinal
A 67-year-old woman is admitted to the hospital with  severe  abdominal  pain.  Gastroscopy  and  a  CT scan reveal a perforating ulcer in the posterior wall of the  stomach,  spilling  stomach  contents  and  blood directly into which of the following areas?   A.  Right subhepatic space   B.  Hepatorenal space   C.  Omental bursa (lesser sac)   D.  Right subphrenic space   E.  Greater sac	C.  Omental bursa (lesser sac)
A  55-year-old  woman  is  admitted  to  the  emer- gency department with severe abdominal pain. She had a history of peptic ulcer disease and recently resumed a  course  of  nonsteroidal  antiinflammatory  drugs  for arthritis pain of her knees. During physical examination the  abdomen  is  flat,  firm,  and  generally  tender  with guarding  and  rebound  tenderness.  An  ultrasound examination  of  the  abdomen  reveals  intraperitoneal fluid.  A  diagnosis  of  perforated  peptic  ulcer  is  established  and  the  patient  is  undergoing  a  laparotomy. Which of the following sites is least likely to show fluid collection in this patient?   A.  Morison’s pouch   B.  The rectouterine pouch   C.  The right paracolic gutter   D.  The greater sac   E.  The omental bursa	D.  The greater sac
A  45-year-old  woman  is  admitted  to  the  emer- gency department with severe right sided lower abdom- inal pain for 1 day. Two days ago the pain was poorly localized to the umbilical region. During physical exam- ination the abdomen is flat, firm, and tender maximally at  McBurney’s  point.  There  is  guarding  and  rebound tenderness  and  bowel  sounds  are  decreased.  Ultrasound  examination  reveals  fluid  in  the  right  paracolic gutter. Which mechanism best explains the initial peri- umbilical pain this patient experienced?   A.  Sympathetic supply to the appendix and somatic sensation to the umbilicus share the same spinal cord levels.   B.  Parasympathetic supply to the appendix share the same spinal cord levels with the umbilicus.   C.  Somatic afferents of the peritoneum were stimulated by the inflamed appendix.   D.  Somatic afferents travel with visceral afferents to T10 spinal cord level.   E.  Somatic afferents synapse with visceral afferents of T10 spinal cord level.	A.  Sympathetic supply to the appendix and somatic sensation to the umbilicus share the same spinal cord levels.
A  45-year-old  woman  is  admitted  to  the  emergency  department  with  abdominal  pain  and  vomiting for the past day. She has a history of gastroesophageal reflux disease and was previously diagnosed with gallstones.  Initially,  her  pain  was  poorly  localized  at  the epigastric region, but became sharp and well localized in  the  right  hypochondrium.  Physical  examination elicits a positive Murphy’s sign. What mechanism best explains the initial pattern of pain?   A.  Visceral afferent fibers synapse with sympathetic fibers at T7 to T9 spinal cord levels   B.  Visceral afferent and sympathetic fibers to the gallbladder share T7 to T9 spinal cord levels   C.  Gallbladder inflammation spread to diaphragmatic peritoneum supplied by phrenic nerve   D.  The inflamed gallbladder contacted the abdominal peritoneum at dermatomes T7 to T9    E.  Visceral afferents travel with intercostal nerves back to T7 to T9 spinal cord levels	B.  Visceral afferent and sympathetic fibers to the gallbladder share T7 to T9 spinal cord levels
A  28-year-old  woman  delivers  an  infant  boy  at term after an uneventful pregnancy. The intern on call reported  that  there  was  clear  fluid  draining  from  the umbilicus  of  the  infant.  The  nurse  is  asked  to  collect some  of  the  fluid  and  performed  a  urine  dipstick  test on  the  same.  The  fluid  was  determined  to  be  urine. Which of  the  following  developmental defects  is most likely to explain this finding?   A.  Obliterated distal end of the urachus   B.  Obliterated proximal end of the urachus   C.  Completely patent urachus   D.  Patent urachus at one point along its length   E.  Completely obliterated urachus	C.  Completely patent urachus
A  33-year-old  woman  is  admitted  to  the  emergency  department  with  complaints  of  sharp,  well demarcated,  right-sided  abdominal  pain  for  one  day, associated  with  fever,  vomiting,  and  loose  stools. During physical examination her abdomen is flat, firm, and  generally  tender.  Maximal  tenderness  and  pain occurred at the McBurney’s point, and a rebound tenderness test was performed. A urine human chorionic gonadotropin  (HCG)  test  was  negative.  What  mechanism correctly explains the distribution of pain in this patient?   A.  Visceral afferents of the appendix travel with sympathetics to T10 spinal cord level    B.  Inflamed visceral peritoneum stimulates somatic intercostal nerves   C.  The appendix is a midgut structure, thus, pain is referred to T10 and T11 dermatomes   D.  Contact of inflamed appendix with visceral peritoneum stimulates visceral afferents    E.  Contact of inflamed appendix with parietal peritoneum stimulates somatic afferents	E.  Contact of inflamed appendix with parietal peritoneum stimulates somatic afferents
An 81-year-old man is admitted to the emergency department with complaints of left side abdominal pain and  fever  for  the  past  2  days.  Physical  examination reveals a soft and tender abdomen but in the left lumbar region there is a firm mass. The psoas sign was negative and bowel sounds were decreased. CT scan of the abdomen  showed  evidence  of  a  large  perinephric abscess. Which of the following will most likely describe the fluid location?   A.  Between renal fascia and transversalis fascia   B.  Between the renal capsule and renal fascia   C.  Between transversalis fascia and peritoneal fascia    D.  Between the renal cortex and renal capsule    E.  Within the paranephric fat	B.  Between the renal capsule and renal fascia
A  55-year-old  woman  is  admitted  to  the  emergency department with complaints of abdominal pain. The pain was epigastric, burning in nature, and occurred after  eating  spicy  or  greasy  foods.  It  improved  with chewable antacids and was not associated with shortness of breath, or diaphoresis. The physician diagnosed the patient with gastroesophageal reflux disease. Which of  the  following  organs  is  not  derived  from  the  same embryological structure as this patient’s stomach?   A.  Spleen   B.  Right bronchus   C.  Second part of the duodenum   D.  Tail of the pancreas   E.  Right lobe of the liver	A.  Spleen
A 45-year-old woman presented to the ER with a one-day  history  of  severe  abdominal  pain,  vomiting, and  fever.  Two  days  previously  the  pain  was  poorly localized to the epigastrium but became sharp in nature and  located  in  the  right  hypochondrium  region.  She now complains of the pain radiating to the right shoulder and scapular region. On physical examination, she is  febrile  (T  40°C),  with  dry  mucous  membranes, icteric, with a soft and tender abdomen and a positive Murphy’s sign. Abdominal ultrasound reveals thickening  of  the  wall  of  the  gallbladder  but  no  free  fluid  in the  abdomen.  Blood  chemistry  shows  elevation  of serum  bilirubin.  Endoscopic  retrograde  cholangiopancreatography  shows  an  obstruction  along  the  extrahepatic  biliary  tree  with  normal  pancreatic  duct  flow. Which structure is most likely to be obstructed in this patient’s condition?   A.  The infundibulum of the gallbladder   B.  The cystic duct   C.  The common bile duct   D.  The hepatopancreatic ampulla   E.  The left hepatic duct	C.  The common bile duct
A 72-year-old woman has abdominal pain, fever, vomiting, diarrhea, and anorexia. She had a history of atrial  fibrillation  but  refused  to  take  warfarin  because it  made  her  feel  unwell.  She  is  admitted  to  the  emergency department looking ill, pale, and with dry mucous membranes.  Vital  signs:  P140  bpm,  BP  90/50,  RR  20/ min, T 40°C. The abdomen was distended and tender in  the  epigastrium  and  umbilical  areas.  There  was guarding and rebound tenderness. Bowel sounds were absent. An erect abdominal radiograph showed dilated small bowel with air-fluid levels with a “stacked coins” appearance.  A  diagnosis  of  mesenteric  ischemia secondary to embolus to intestinal vessel(s) was made. If  the  superior  mesenteric  artery  was  occluded,  how could the midgut receive its blood supply?   A.  Anastomosis between left and right gastric arteries   B.  Anastomosis between left and right gastroepiploic arteries   C.  Anastomosis between left and right gastro-omental arteries   D.  Anastomosis between superior and inferior pancreaticoduodenal arteries   E.  Anastomosis between adjacent short gastric	D.  Anastomosis between superior and inferior pancreaticoduodenal arteries
A  72-year-old  woman  is  admitted  to  the  emer- gency department with complaints of abdominal pain. The onset of pain was sudden and severe about 1 hour before presentation. The patient had a history of diverticular  disease,  cigarette  smoking,  and  alcohol  abuse. On examination, he was in painful distress and diaphoretic.  Vital  signs:  P110  bpm,  BP  100/50,  RR  30/min, afebrile. The abdomen was firm with tenderness in the epigastrium,  guarding,  and  rebound  tenderness.  A  CT abdomen  showed  pneumoperitoneum  under  the  diaphragm. Laparotomy revealed a perforation of the posterior  wall  of  the  third  part  of  the  duodenum.  Which of the following structure(s) are most likely in immediate danger in this patient?   A.  Aorta and inferior vena cava   B.  Superior mesenteric artery and vein   C.  Head of the pancreas   D.  Transverse colon   E.  Greater curvature of the stomach	A.  Aorta and inferior vena cava
A  51-year-old  man  is  admitted  to  the  emergency department  after  a  2-month  history  of  difficulty  swallowing,  vomiting,  and  weight  loss.  The  patient  had  a history  of  gastroesophageal  reflux  disease  and  was treated with antibiotics for Helicobacter pylori 10 years previously. He also had a 20-pack year history of ciga- rette smoking. On physical examination, the abdomen was  soft  and  nontender.  An  ultrasound  examination revealed  a  4  ×  6 cm  hard,  irregular  nonpulsatile  and nontender  mass  resembling  a  Sister  Mary  Joseph nodule  in  the  umbilical  area.  An  abdominal  CT  scan revealed  a  large  mass  involving  the  stomach  in  the region of the lesser curvature. What other structure(s) are  most  likely  at  immediate  risk  of  damage  by  the tumor in this patient?   A.  Right and left gastroepiploic vessels   B.  Right and left pancreaticoduodenal vessels   C.  Right and left gastric vessels    D.  The portal triad    E.  Short gastric vessels	C.  Right and left gastric vessels
A 55-year-old woman presents with complaints of weight  loss,  pale  colored  stool,  and  tea-colored  urine to  the  emergency  department.  Lab  blood  tests  are  as follows:  serum  bilirubin  =  5 mg/dL,  elevated  alanine aminotransferase  (ALT),  aspartate  aminotransferase (AST),  alkaline  phosphatase  (ALP),  gamma-glutamyl transferase  (GGT),  and  increased  prothrombin  time. Physical  examination  reveals  yellowing  of  the  sclerae. She  is  diagnosed  with  cholestasis.  An  ultrasound  performed reveals dilation of the biliary tree. During laparoscopic  cholecystectomy,  it  is  found  that  the  patient has an aberrant cystic artery. What are the boundaries of the triangle of Calot?   A.  Inferior border of the left ventricle (LV), cystic duct, common hepatic duct   B.  Gallbladder, hepatic duct, bile duct    C.  Inferior border of LV, bile duct, common hepatic duct   D.  Cystic artery, inferior border of LV, bile duct    E.  Cystic artery, common hepatic duct, bile duct	A.  Inferior border of the left ventricle (LV), cystic duct, common hepatic duct
A  10-year-old  boy  is  imaged  following  an  injury while camping. A laceration of the body of the pancreas is  seen  with  hemorrhage  around  the  vessel  traveling along the superior border of the pancreas. Which vessel is this?   A.  Superior mesenteric artery   B.  Portal vein   C.  Left gastric artery   D.  Splenic artery   E.  Left gastro-omental artery	D.  Splenic artery
A  5-year-old  girl  is  brought  to  the  emergency department  because  of  fever  and  severe  abdominal pain. Acute appendicitis is diagnosed. In the emergency department, she keeps her right thigh flexed and resists extension  at  the  hip.  If  the  thigh  is  extended  there  is severe  pain  caused  by  stretching  the  irritated  parietal peritoneum lying over which muscle?   A.  Psoas major   B.  External abdominal oblique   C.  Obturator internus   D.  Transversus abdominis   E.  Quadratus lumborum	A.  Psoas major
A  40-year-old  woman  with  a  history  of  obesity and diabetes develops abdominal pain. Lab results and ultrasound  examination  support  a  diagnosis  of  acute cholecystitis.  The  patient  undergoes  a  laparoscopic cholecystectomy.  Which  of  the  following  structures would most likely be identified and ligated within the triangle of Calot?   A.  Bile duct   B.  Right hepatic duct   C.  Cystic duct   D.  Right hepatic artery   E.  Cystic artery	E.  Cystic artery
A 34-year-old man is admitted to the hospital after a car crash. A CT scan reveals a lacerated spleen which requires an urgent splenectomy. During the procedure, the  surgeon  ligates  the  blood  supply  of  the  spleen  at its  hilum.  Improper  placement  of  the  ligature  may occlude the artery that supplies which of the following structures?   A.  Fundus of the stomach   B.  Kidney   C.  Pyloric sphincter   D.  Head of the pancreas   E.  Splenic flexure of the colon	A.  Fundus of the stomach
A 55-year-old man with a history of portal hypertension  is  brought  to  the  emergency  department  with severe abdominal  pain. A  CT  scan  of  his  chest,  at  the vertebra  level  T7,  reveals  a  circular  grey  structure immediately  anterior  to  the  vertebral  bodies  and  just to  the  right  of  midline.  The  structure  appears  to  be much  larger  than  usual.  Given  the  location  and  the patient’s history what is this structure?   A.  Inferior vena cava   B.  Superior vena cava   C.  Esophagus   D.  Azygos vein   E.  Pulmonary vein	D.  Azygos vein
A  45-year-old  man  is  admitted  to  the  surgical ward for a scheduled procedure to remove a renal cell carcinoma.  The  CT  scan  reveals  the  renal  cell  carcinoma  is  confined  within  the  renal  fascia  of  the  right kidney.  Using  a  posterolateral  approach  to  reach  the kidney  which  of  the  following  layers  will  most  likely have to be incised?   A.  Parietal pleura   B.  Diaphragmatic pleura   C.  Parietal peritoneum   D.  Transversalis fascia   E.  Visceral peritoneum	D.  Transversalis fascia
A  43-year-old  man  is  admitted  to  the  emergency department with a severe upper right quadrant abdominal  pain.  An  ultrasonographic  examination  reveals thickened inflamed gallbladder walls and several large echogenic gallstones. During laparoscopic cholecystectomy  the  scope  is  passed  into  the  greater  sac  through a  small  port  in  the  anterior  abdominal  wall.  Which organ is the surgeon unable to view directly?   A.  Ileum   B.  Jejunum   C.  Pancreas   D.  Stomach   E.  Transverse colon	C.  Pancreas
A 25-year-old man visits the gastroenterology outpatient clinic because of several episodes of dark blood in his stools for the past 2 weeks. A stool examination confirms  blood.  A  CT  scan  shows  no  tumors  in  the abdomen  or  rectum.  A  technetium-99  scan  shows  a 2-inch  long  spot  of  radioactive  accumulation  in  the midabdomen. Which of the following is the most likely diagnosis?   A.  Gastritis   B.  Hirschsprung’s disease   C.  Hemorrhoids   D.  Meckel diverticulum   E.  Anal fissure	D.  Meckel diverticulum
A  21-year-old  man  presents  to  the  emergency department  with  fever  and  a  high  white  blood  cell count. He reports having suffered a small stab wound in his back a few months ago. Because it was a shallow wound,  he  did  not  seek  medical  attention.  The  physician  states  that  he  has  a  retroperitoneal  abdominal infection.  Which  of  the  following  structures  is  most likely to be affected?   A.  Descending colon   B.  Jejunum   C.  Stomach   D.  Transverse colon   E.  Appendix	A.  Descending colon
A 68-year-old man complained of acute onset low back pain on the right with concomitant loss of sensa- tion of the skin in the posterolateral gluteal and anterior pubic  regions  on  the  right  side.  During  the  physical examination, the patient experienced severe pain infe- rior to the twelfth rib at the right costovertebral angle when the physician palpated there. The physician also found that the patient had paralysis of the right internal oblique and transversus abdominis muscles. An abdom- inal  CT  scan  revealed  a  tumor  that  originated  in  the right kidney, broke through the center of the posterior renal capsule and pressed on the ipsilateral quadratus lumborum muscle. Which of the following nerves was most likely compressed by the tumor?   A.  Subcostal   B.  Lateral cutaneous nerve of thigh   C.  Ilioinguinal   D.  Femoral   E.  Iliohypogastric	E.  Iliohypogastric
A 15-year-old boy who is an amateur bodybuilder has dreams of one day becoming a professional bodybuilder. To that end, he begins an intensive abdominal workout  routine  consisting  of  sit-ups  and  crunches  to develop his “6-pack.” The muscle that this adolescent is  isolating  in  his  workout  to  get  the  “6-pack”  look attaches to which of the following skeletal areas?   A.  Iliac crest   B.  Ribs 10 to 12   C.  Pubic crest   D.  Costal cartilages 7 to 12   E.  Xiphoid process	C.  Pubic crest
A 52-year-old man with a long history of alcoholic cirrhosis complained of severe dysphagia and retroster- nal “burning” pain. During esophagoscopy, the endoscopist advanced the endoscope until its tip reached the esophageal  hiatus  of  the  diaphragm.  At  which  of  the following vertebral levels did the tip of the endoscope most likely end?   A.  T7   B.  T8   C.  T10   D.  T11   E.  T12	C.  T10
The following statement was written in an abdominal  surgery  report:  “The  patient’s  abdominal  aortic aneurysm  was  repaired  using  an  endovascular  graft where the center of the graft was in-line with the sub- costal plane.” Based on this information, the center of the  graft  was  most  likely  anterior  to  which  of  the  following vertebrae?   A.  L1   B.  L2   C.  L3   D.  L4   E.  L5	C.  L3
A 59-year-old man with a long history of alcoholism  and  cirrhosis  underwent  a  right  hepatectomy. During the surgery the surgeon divided the liver in the principal plane. Which of the following liver segments were most likely removed by the surgeon?   A.  V, VI, VII, VIII   B.  IV, V, VI, VII   C.  III, IV, V, VI   D.  II, III, IV, V   E.  I, II, III, IV	A.  V, VI, VII, VIII
A 50-year-old man with a long history of alcohol abuse  staggers  into  the  emergency  department  and complains of severe abdominal pain. Physical examination of his abdomen reveals caput medusae. The blood vessel  that  is  obstructed  in  this  patient  is  most  likely formed by the union of which of the following vessels?   A.  Right and left common iliac arteries   B.  Superior mesenteric and left gastric veins   C.  Inferior mesenteric and left gastric veins   D.  Inferior mesenteric and paraumbilical veins   E.  Superior mesenteric and splenic veins	E.  Superior mesenteric and splenic veins
A patient was found to have a tumor in the middle of the posterior wall of the stomach that perforated the stomach  at  this  location.  Diagnostic  imaging  revealed that stomach fluid had traversed the resultant aperture. Which of the following spaces did the fluid most likely first enter after it traversed the aperture?   A.  Supracolic compartment   B.  Omental foramen   C.  Infracolic compartment   D.  Paracolic gutter   E.  Omental bursa	E.  Omental bursa
An  abdominal  computed  tomography  scan  of  a 68-year-old woman revealed complete occlusion of her inferior vena cava at the L3 vertebral level. As a result of  the  occlusion,  which  of  the  following  veins  most likely acted as collateral channels to allow blood to flow from the lower to upper parts of her body?   A.  Left common iliac   B.  Hemiazygos   C.  Ascending lumbar   D.  Azygos   E.  Left renal	C.  Ascending lumbar
A  19-year-old  gang  member  was  shot  with  a 9-mm  bullet  in  his  right  lower  quadrant.  The  bullet entered and traversed the anterolateral abdominal wall. The following structures form the layers of this wall.    1.  Internal oblique muscle    2.  Transversalis fascia     3.  Transversus abdominis muscle     4.  Camper fascia     5.  Scarpa fascia     6.  External oblique muscle Which of the following best represents the order of structures traversed by the bullet?   A.  4-5-6-1-3-2     B.  4-5-2-6-1-3    C.  4-5-1-6-3-2    D.  4-2-6-1-3-5    E.  5-4-6-1-3-2	A.  4-5-6-1-3-2
A  72-year-old  man  with  a  family  history  of colon  cancer  is  referred  for  colonoscopy.  The  scope typically  passes  through  the  entire  colon  in  order  to examine  for  any  abnormal  surface  changes  in  the lumen  of  the  colon.  Which  of  the  following  colonic landmark  is  indicative  that  the  end  of  the  colon  has been reached?   A.  Hepatic flexure   B.  Splenic flexure   C.  Paracolic gutter   D.  Ileocecal valve   E.  Gastroesophageal (GE) junction	D.  Ileocecal valve
A 55-year-old man who has cirrhosis of the liver due to a chronic hepatitis B infection is brought to the emergency  department  because  he  has  been  vomiting blood for 2 hours. He has a 2-month history of abdominal distention, dilated veins over the anterior abdominal  wall,  and  internal  hemorrhoids.  The  anastomosis of which portal system vein with the esophageal veins can result in the hematemesis?   A.  Right gastric   B.  Periumbilical   C.  Left gastric   D.  Splenic   E.  Left gastroomental	C.  Left gastric
A  55-year-old  man  complained  of  nausea  and abdominal pain around his umbilical area. Examination revealed that he had an inflamed appendix, which was subsequently  surgically  removed.  Which  nerve  fibers carried the pain from the inflamed appendix?   A.  Somatic afferents   B.  Preganglionic sympathetic   C.  Preganglionic parasympathetic   D.  Postganglionic sympathetic   E.  Visceral afferent	E.  Visceral afferent
A  32-year-old  man  presents  to  the  emergency department with severe pain in the left lower quadrant radiating over his lower back. Blood was found in the urine. Ultrasound examination revealed that the ureters were of normal size, but the left renal pelvis appeared enlarged and the renal calyces were rounded or blunted. Assuming  that  his  symptoms  and  anatomical  changes are  due  to  a  urinary  stone,  where  is  the  most  likely location for this stone to be lodged?   A.  Urethra   B.  Bladder   C.  Ureter at the uretero-vesical junction   D.  Ureter at the pelvic brim   E.  Ureter at the uretero-pelvic junction	E.  Ureter at the uretero-pelvic junction
A 49-year-old man presents with acute abdominal pain  and  jaundice  resulting  from  a  tumor  at  the  head of  the  pancreas.  The  tumor  will  most  likely  obstruct which of the following structures?   A.  Bile duct   B.  Common hepatic duct   C.  Left hepatic duct   D.  Cystic duct   E.  Right hepatic duct	A.  Bile duct
A  44-year  old  man  is  admitted  to  the  emergency department  with  severe  vomiting.  Examination  of  the vomitus  reveals  the  presence  of  bile.  Imaging  reveals part  of  the  bowel  being  compressed  between  the abdominal aorta and superior mesenteric artery. Which part is being compressed?   A.  Second part of duodenum   B.  Ileum   C.  Thirds part of duodenum   D.  First and second part of duodenum   E.  Proximal part of jejunum	C.  Thirds part of duodenum
A  47-year-old  man  is  undergoing  surgical  repair of  a  perforated  duodenal  ulcer.  During  the  procedure the gastroduodenal artery is ligated. A branch of which artery will continue to supply blood to the duodenum in this patient?   A.  Splenic   B.  Left gastric   C.  Right gastric   D.  Proper hepatic   E.  Superior mesenteric	E.  Superior mesenteric
A  14-year-old  girl  presents  to  the  emergency department complaining of severe difficulty breathing. On  physical  examination  it  is  noted  that  she  has  a prolonged  expiratory  phase  due  to  bronchospasm leading  to  the  diagnosis  of  asthma.  Which  of  the  fol- lowing nerves is responsible for the constriction of the bronchial smooth muscle cells?   A.  Vagus   B.  Phrenic   C.  Greater thoracic splanchnic   D.  Cardiopulmonary   E.  Intercostal	A.  Vagus
A  70-year-old  woman  is  admitted  to  the  hospital with intense abdominal pain from a pancreatic tumor. A  neurectomy  is  performed  to  interrupt  the  neural pathway carrying pain from the pancreas. Which structure was severed?   A.  Vagus nerve   B.  Phrenic nerve   C.  Celiac ganglion   D.  Aorticorenal ganglion   E.  Inferior mesenteric ganglion	C.  Celiac ganglion
A  39-year-old  woman  presents  to  the  emergency department with pain in her right side that radiates to the  suprapubic  region.  She  also  has  hematuria  and  a history  of  urinary  tract  infections.  A  CT  scan  reveals polycystic kidney disease with stretched capsule. Which nerve  will  convey  the  pain  to  the  central  nervous system (CNS)?   A.  Greater thoracic splanchnic nerve   B.  Lesser thoracic splanchnic nerve   C.  Pelvic splanchnic nerve   D.  Celiac plexus   E.  Iliohypogastric nerve	E.  Iliohypogastric nerve
A  21-year-old  woman  is  admitted  to  the  hospital with  pain  radiating  from  her  lower  back  towards  her pubic symphysis. A kidney stone is suspected and ultrasound  reveals  a  stone  partially  obstructing  the  lower part  of  her  right  ureter.  The  stone  is  probably  lodged where the ureter crosses which structure?   A.  Inferior vena cava   B.  Internal iliac artery   C.  Common iliac artery   D.  Fourth lumbar artery   E.  Inferior mesenteric artery	C.  Common iliac artery
A  40-year-old  woman  with  jaundice  and  epigas- tric pain was taken to the emergency department where examination  showed  stones  in  the  bile  duct  and  gallbladder.  During  laparoscopic  cholecystectomy  the surgeon had to ligate and cut the cystic artery. A branch from which nervous structure traveling along the artery was also cut?   A.  Inferior mesenteric plexus   B.  Superior mesenteric plexus   C.  Celiac plexus   D.  Aorticorenal plexus   E.  Superior hypogastric plexus	C.  Celiac plexus
Seven  hours  after  delivery  a  baby  began  crying and started to vigorously vomit. On physical examination his abdomen appeared distended and it was noted that  he  had  passed  small  amounts  of  meconium.  Two abdominal  radiographs  are  shown  below  (Fig.  3-9). Which of the following embryological abnormalities is the most likely cause of the baby’s condition?   A.  Defect in the tracheoesophageal septum   B.  Failure of the muscular tissue from the body wall to extend into the pleuroperitoneal membrane   C.  Failure of recanalization of the duodenum    D.  Malrotation of the intestines    E.  Defective fusion of the pleuroperitoneal membranes	C.  Failure of recanalization of the duodenum
Autopsy  of  a  newborn  boy  reveals  multiple  congenital heart defects in addition to absence of kidneys and poorly developed ureters bilaterally. Ultrasonography  at  28  weeks’  gestation  would  most  likely  have shown which of the following?   A.  Polyhydramnios   B.  Annular pancreas   C.  Malrotation of the gut   D.  Bilateral gonadal dysgenesis   E.  Oligohydramnios	E.  Oligohydramnios
A  35-year-old  man  is  in  surgery  for  a  ruptured appendix.  A  midline  incision  was  made  for  greater access  to  the  peritoneal  cavity.  The  surgeon  noted  a 2-inch long finger-like pouch on the anterior border of the ileum about 2 feet away from the ileocecal junction. This is a remnant of which developmental structure?   A.  Omphaloenteric duct   B.  Branch of superior mesenteric artery   C.  Connecting stalk   D.  Cecal diverticulum   E.  Umbilical cord	A.  Omphaloenteric duct
A neonate was born at 34 weeks of gestation and was admitted for pneumonitis. A CT scan reveals that the  upper  segment  of  the  esophagus  ends  blindly  and the  presence  of  an  abnormal  communication  between trachea and the lower segment of esophagus. Which of the  following  clinical  conditions  is  most  likely  seen with this congenital anomaly?   A.  Polyhydramnios   B.  Oligohydramnios   C.  Anhydramnios   D.  Umbilicoileal fistula   E.  Down syndrome	A.  Polyhydramnios
A newborn boy has a foul-smelling yellow-brown discharge  from  his  umbilicus.  A  catheter  was  inserted into  a  small  opening  in  the  umbilicus  and  contrast material  was  injected  before  acquiring  an  abdominal radiograph. The radiograph demonstrated that the contrast material filled the loops of ileum through a small (4  to  5 cm)  connection  between  the  ileum  and  the umbilicus.  Based  on  these  findings,  which  of  the  fol- lowing is the most likely diagnosis?   A.  Ileal diverticulum   B.  Ileal diverticulum with ulceration   C.  Omphaloenteric fistula   D.  Omphaloenteric cyst   E.  Persistent vitelline artery	C.  Omphaloenteric fistula
A 4-year-old boy is admitted to the hospital with severe bile-stained vomiting. Radiographic examination and history taking reveals that the boy suffers from an annular  pancreas.  Which  structure  is  most  likely obstructed by this condition?   A.  Pylorus of the stomach   B.  First part of the duodenum    C.  Second part of the duodenum    D.  Third part of the duodenum    E.  Jejunum	C.  Second part of the duodenum
A  2-year-old  boy  is  seen  by  the  pediatrician because his parents notice a gradually enlarging scrotal mass.  Transillumination  and  scrotal  ultrasound  reveal a  large  fluid  collection  around  a  normally  developed testis. Which of the following structures has most likely developed abnormally?   A.  Deep inguinal ring   B.  Tunica albuginea   C.  Processus vaginalis   D.  Gubernaculum   E.  Dartos tunic	C.  Processus vaginalis
A  1-year-old  boy  is  seen  in  the  pediatric  clinic because  the  mother  has  noticed  only  one  testis  in  the scrotum  of  her  child.  The  pediatrician  examined  the infant  and  palpated  the  testis  in  the  inguinal  canal. Which condition is this?   A.  Pseudohermaphroditism   B.  True hermaphroditism   C.  Cryptorchidism   D.  Retractile testes   E.  Chordee	C.  Cryptorchidism
A  25-year-old  woman  in  the  8th  month  of  pregnancy  went  to  the  outpatient  clinic  for  her  prenatal checkup.  Ultrasound  examination  of  the  fetus  showed part  of  the  small  bowel  herniating  into  the  amniotic cavity due to failure of fusion of the lateral folds in the abdominal region. Which condition is this?   A.  Volvulus   B.  Nonrotated gut   C.  Situs inversus   D.  Gastroschisis   E.  Ileal diverticulum	D.  Gastroschisis
A  newborn  girl  with  Down’s  syndrome  begins vomiting shortly after her first feeding. The vomitus is stained  with  bile.  Which  condition  is  most  likely causing the vomiting?   A.  Atresia of the third part of the duodenum   B.  Atresia of the first part of the duodenum   C.  Congenital hypertrophic pyloric stenosis   D.  Esophageal stenosis   E.  Tracheoesophageal fistula	A.  Atresia of the third part of the duodenum
A  2-day-old  girl  with  fever  is  examined  by  the pediatric  team.  Imaging  reveals  malrotation  of  the small  intestine  with  unfixed  mesenteries.  The  vessels around the duodenojejunal junction are obstructed and gangrene  of  the  intestine  is  developing.  Which  condi- tion has probably caused this?   A.  Diaphragmatic atresia   B.  Subhepatic cecum   C.  Midgut volvulus   D.  Duplication of the intestine   E.  Congenital megacolon	C.  Midgut volvulus
A  5-day-old  infant  boy  presents  with  abdominal distention,  constipation,  and  vomiting.  A  CT  scan reveals  an  abnormally  dilated  descending  colon  and  a diagnosis  of  Hirschsprung  disease  (megacolon)  is made. What is the embryologic mechanism responsible for Hirschsprung disease?   A.  Failure of neural crest cells to migrate into the walls of the colon   B.  Incomplete separation of the cloaca    C.  Failure of recanalization of the colon    D.  Defective rotation of the hindgut    E.  Oligohydramnios	A.  Failure of neural crest cells to migrate into the walls of the colon
A  32-year-old  man  visits  his  family  physician complaining of groin pain. Examination reveals that the patient has an indirect inguinal hernia. Which nerve is most likely responsible for the pain transmission?   A.  Iliohypogastric   B.  Lateral femoral cutaneous   C.  Ilioinguinal    D.  Lumbar splanchnic    E.  Greater thoracic splanchnic	C.  Ilioinguinal
A  26-year-old  man  visits  his  family  physician complaining  of  a  number  of  areas  of  thickened  scaly skin  on  his  abdominal  wall  below  the  level  of  the umbilicus.  The  physician  suspected  actinic  keratosis, which is a premalignant condition and can progress to squamous cell carcinoma. Which lymph nodes will first receive drainage from this area of skin?   A.  Deep inguinal   B.  External iliac   C.  Internal iliac   D.  Lateral aortic   E.  Superficial inguinal	E.  Superficial inguinal
A 33-year-old man requests a vasectomy. During the procedure the urologist separates the various layers of the spermatic cord to expose the ductus deferens so that it can be ligated and cut. From which structure is the internal spermatic fascia derived?   A.  Internal abdominal oblique muscle   B.  Cremaster muscle   C.  External abdominal oblique muscle   D.  Transversus abdominis aponeurosis   E.  Transversalis fascia	E.  Transversalis fascia
A  45-year-old  man  presents  to  the  emergency department  with  severe  nausea  and  recurrent  bilious vomiting.  Past  medical  history  reveals  that  his  symptoms  initially  began  1  month  ago  as  postprandial  epi- gastric pain, but have worsened during the past week. Physical  examination  shows  a  slightly  tender  and  dis- tended  abdomen  with  high-pitched  bowel  sounds.  A CT  scan  reveals  that  the  angle  between  the  superior mesenteric  artery  and  the  aorta  is  significantly decreased.  Which  of  the  following  structures  is  most likely to be obstructed by the artery?   A.  Ascending portion of the duodenum   B.  Descending portion of the duodenum   C.  Duodenal bulb   D.  Duodenojejunal flexure   E.  Transverse portion of the duodenum	E.  Transverse portion of the duodenum
A  70-year-old  man  is  admitted  to  the  emergency department  complaining  of  cramping  midabdominal pain,  abdominal  distention,  and  vomiting  for  the  past 24  hours.  History  reveals  that  the  patient  suffers  from gallstones.  Abdominal  radiograph  reveals  air  in  the gallbladder  and  biliary  tree.  In  which  of  the  following sites is a gallstone most likely lodged?    A.  Cystic duct    B.  Bile duct    C.  Duodenum    D.  Jejunum    E.  Ileum	B.  Bile duct
Which of the following age ranges best represents when the bones that form the acetabulum fuse?   A.  13 to 15 years   B.  16 to 18 years   C.  19 to 21 years   D.  22 to 24 years   E.  25 to 27 years	B.  16 to 18 years
A  68-year-old  man  was  found  to  have  a  tumor that  originated  from  the  lining  of  the  urinary  bladder. During transurethral resection to remove the tumor, the cystoscope  entered  the  urinary  bladder.  Which  of  the following structures did the cystoscope traverse immediately before entering the urinary bladder?   A.  Intramural part of urethra   B.  Intermediate part of urethra   C.  Prostatic urethra   D.  Spongy urethra   E.  Paraurethral part	A.  Intramural part of urethra
A 38-year-old man was diagnosed with metastatic cancer  of  the  left  testes.  Which  of  the  following  most likely represents the route by which the cancer spread from the left testes to the rest of the body?   A.  Left testicular vein; inferior vena cava; left renal vein   B.  Right testicular vein; left testicular vein; inferior vena cava   C.  Left testicular vein; left common iliac vein; inferior vena cava   D.  Left testicular vein; median sacral vein; inferior vena cava   E.  Left testicular vein; left renal vein; inferior vena cava	E.  Left testicular vein; left renal vein; inferior vena cava
A  gynecology  resident  physician  was  performing a pelvic examination on a 25-year-old woman who was in  the  lithotomy  position  during  a  physical  examination. In order to palpate the patient’s uterus, the index and  middle  fingers  of  the  resident’s  right  hand  were inside her vagina while the fingers of his left hand were pressing on the abdomen inferior to the umbilicus. The resident  concomitantly  lowered  his  left  palm  onto  the patient’s  skin  and  felt  a  bony  structure  in  the  lower midline. Which of the following structures did the resident most likely feel on the palm of his left hand?   A.  Ilium   B.  Coccyx   C.  Sacrum   D.  Ischium   E.  Pubis	E.  Pubis
A  21-year-old  man  presents  to  the  emergency department  with  fever  and  a  high  white  blood  cell count. He reports having suffered a small stab wound in his back a few months ago. Because it was a shallow wound,  he  did  not  seek  medical  attention.  The  physician  states  that  he  has  a  retroperitoneal  infection. Which  of  the  following  structures  is  most  likely  to  be affected?   A.  Descending colon   B.  Jejunum   C.  Stomach   D.  Transverse colon   E.  Appendix	A.  Descending colon
A 67-year-old man complained of the acute onset of lower back pain on the right with concomitant loss of sensation of the skin in the posterolateral gluteal and anterior  pubic  regions  on  the  right  side.  During  the physical  examination,  the  patient  experienced  severe pain  inferior  to  the  twelfth  rib  at  the  right  costovertebral  angle  with  palpation.  The  physician  also  found that  the  patient  had  paralysis  of  the  right  internal oblique and transversus abdominis muscles. An abdominal  CT  scan  revealed  a  tumor  that  originated  in  the right  kidney,  entered  the  posterior  renal  capsule,  and pressed on the ipsilateral quadratus lumborum muscle. Which  of  the  following  nerves  was  most  likely  compressed by the tumor?   A.  Subcostal   B.  Lateral cutaneous nerve of thigh   C.  Ilioinguinal   D.  Femoral   E.  Iliohypogastric	E.  Iliohypogastric
