#separator:tab
#html:false
Scleritis: Commonly associated with	RA
Most common ocular finding of RA:	KCS
BAND KERATOPATHY: Associated with	JIA
Bowman’s condition which leads to ____ deposits in this layer	calcium
Band Keratopathy	Dry eye, gout, hypercalcemia (too much calcium) aka increase in parathyroid, uveitis
Reis Buckler’s	Bowman's
STROMAL condition; bilateral gray-white polygonal stromal opacities they MAY involve bowman	Crocodile Shagreen:
initial damage occurs in BOWMAN's but in advanced stage may present corneal hydrops due to Descemet's	KCN:
Rhinophyma, telangiectasia, facial flushing (malar or butterfly rash)	ACNE/OCULAR ROSACEA:
Unilateral + respects the dermatome (does NOT cross the midline)PseudodendritesTingling on forehead, malaise, and fever (prodrome)Hutchinson’s sign (vesicles on nose)UveitisTrabeculitisAcute retinal necrosis	Herpes Zoster
20 yo diagnosed with HZO → must evaluate for _____	HIV
Vesicles found on the upper eyelid → what does the patient have?	Primary ocular HSV
Bergmeister’s papilla: Remnant of hyaloid artery on the ____	optic disc
Mittendorf’s dot: Remnant of hyaloid artery on the _____	posterior lens capsule
Epicapsular star: Located on ___________- Remnant of the epicapsular stars is tunica vasculosa lentis	anterior lens capsule
Adhesion of anterior vitreous/post zonules/lens	Weiger’s ligament:
Berger’s space: anterior hyaloid and posterior lens capsule	ANTERIOR HYALOID:
Steroids cause	PSC cataracts
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM:	Angioid streaks
Divided into orbital and palpebral portion by the tendon of the superior levator palpebral	LACRIMAL GLAND
Muscle that help drains tears medially—	orbic oculi
What is lined by an endothelium:	posterior surface of cornea
Girl from seasonal allergies + rubs eyes which comes in with an uneven lid crease?	levator aponeurosis (acquired)
Lower leg weakness due to	ANTERIOR CEREBRAL ARTERY
Anterior chamber volume:	250 uL
Inferior SPK:	Lagophthalmos, thyroid, entropion, trichiasis, FES
Which uveitis would NOT need to be cultured to help you diagnose?	Bilateral gran, bilateral non gran, uni gran, uni non gran
Which section of MRI scan shows the complete pathway of the optic nerve?	Axial cut
Histoplasmosis triad:	Multifocal histo spots (chorioretinal punched out lesions)Peripapillary atrophyMaculopathy (CNVM)
Which is not on the lateral wall of cavernous sinus?	CN 6 aka abducens nerve
Initially damages Bowman’s membrane, stromal thinning, progressive, typically bilateral	KCN signs:
Brown pigment horizontal on inferior 1/3 of cornea and between limbus…	Hudson-Stähli line or Fleischer ring
Corneal scar is mostly made of….	keratin sulfate
59 year old with accident and had corneal scar... in 10 years is this sensory strab or deprivational amblyopia?	sensory strab
Yellowish ring:	Kayser-Fleishcher ring (copper) seen in Wilson’s diseaseWilson’s disease aka hepatolenticular
Iron deposits:  Fleischer’s ring Hudson Stahli  linesStocker’s line Ferry’s line	1. KCN 2. elderly 3. Pterygium 4. Filtering bleb
Which ganglion does reflex tearing:	Trigeminal ganglion (CN V) and pterygopalatine ganglion (CN VII)
Early signs of EKC:	Follicles, serous discharge, SEI’s lymphadenopathy, diffuse keratitis
Signs/Sx of VKC:	Giant papillae, intense itching, corneal filament, and ropy mucous discharge, perennial young boy
Crystalline lens has	large amounts of VIT C
Primary retinal blood barrier for the inner retina:	Tight junctions between the vascular endothelial cells/wall of the retinal vessels
Blood aqueous barrier:	Minor circle (located in iris stroma) Schlemm’s canal NPCE
Ptosis & Diplopia worse in PM	Myasthenia gravis:
Toxoplasmosis Gondii: Infected by	CATS
Rhegmatogenous RD: Separation between the	RPE and photoreceptor layer
Flame hemes are in	RNFL (with picture of DISC HEME ALSO)
Which nerve provides sensory to the lower eyelid?	Infratrochlear nerve
Most likely signs/symptoms of cat scratch	neuroretinitis, follicular conjunctivitis, lymphadenopathy, disc edema, macular star, unilateral decreased vision
conjunctival inflammation with preauricular adenopathy	Parinaud oculoglandular syndrome
iris dilator muscle in the anterior iris pigment epithelium	Alpha 1
peripheral corneal thinning, starts circumferentially and progresses to the center	Mooren’s ulcer:
superior peripheral thinning with no epi defect (or superior-nasal most common)	Terrien’s marginal degeneration:
Loss of proprioception:	Cuneate fasciculus
Tongue deviates toward right side =	right hypoglossal defect (CN 12)
What muscle comes out of maxilla?	IO
What nerve does not pass through foramen magnum?	CN XII (12) -- Hypoglossal
Triad for PCF:	Follicular conjunctivitis fever pharyngitis
Traid for Hutchinson’s congenital syphilis:	Hutchinson’s incisors (malformed teeth and mulberry molars); interstitial keratitis and eighth cranial nerve deafness
Where are zonules attached to the lens?	Anterior lens capsule
Patient has trouble with the IR, where do they have trouble seeing?	Up gaze
Patient tilt head toward shoulder, what eye movement are they compensating for?	VOR
Stabilizes image on fovea during BRIEF head movements	VOR
What 2 things are present with PAS?	Angle closure and plateau iris syndrome
What 2 tests are most common in CT scans?	Axial and sagittal
Patient eyes moves down when uncovered OD and OS?	Vertical dissociation
MRI picture asking which EOM is missing?	IO
How much corneal thickness should be left after LASIK?	250 microns
Which surgery completely takes out Bowman’s layer?	PRK
What layers are altered in PRK at the time of surgery	(epithelium, bowmans, anterior stroma)
Penetrating keratoplasty — which layers are affected	All layers of central cornea, peripheral cornea is maintained
High IOP after cataract surgery?	Retained viscoelastic
Picture of a figure of a person asking what nerve would be affected?	Infraorbital
The lens is derived from the same as?	Corneal epithelium (surface ectoderm)
Bowman’s dystrophy:	Reis Buckler
Most common cause of infectious blindness in the cornea?	Herpes simplex keratitis
What corneal dystrophy starts in the stroma?	Macular dystrophy
Causes of stromal dehydration/thinning next to pinguecula?	Damage to palisades of Vogt
Intense itching; giant papillae; watery eyes	VKC
Fuchs causes build up of?	Descemet’s membrane
which slit lamp views fuchs on endo?	Specular reflection
What must be in 2 quadrants to be classified as severe NPDR?	Venous beading
How  to determine if a patient has an epiphora or something else?	Jones 1
Which arteries combine with the circle of willis?	ICA and vertebral
hyperglycemia, osteoporosis, etc. also poor wound healing, HTN an elevated serum cholesterol	Cushing syndrome
White + yellow bump on eye near the limbus?	Dermoid
What are exudates made of?	Lipid
Patient comes in with trauma to the head/cav sinus, what is their complaint?	Subjective bruit, diplopia, blurry vision (look for pain)
Which 2 causes neurotrophic keratopathy?	DM and herpes
Gonio lens, you see iris attached to TM =	PAS
Risks for RD:	Hx of other eye with RD, recent cataract surgery
Traction on macula: VMT, macular hole, ERM, incomplete PVD????	
Y suture in what layer of the lens?	Fetal nucleus
pre-equatorial region of the lens	Lens mitosis happens here
What antagonizes the LPS?	Orbicularis oculi
Wake up in AM with irritated eyes and sheathing at the base of the lashes	DEMODEX
External hordeolum is due to staph abscess -- glands of ____ or ____	glands of zeiss or moll
Trauma/surgery hx, gram (+), most staph epidermidis, hypopyon, vitritis, chemosis	Acute endophthalmitis → hypopyon, corectopia, uvea, pain
collection of WBCs in the inferior cornea	hypopyon
Trigeminal nerve R → goes to	R EYE
Abducens nerves goes to which oculomotor nucleus	Abducens nerve goes to contralateral oculomotor nucleus via MLF
Which organ can have liquefactive necrosis post infection --	Brain
Which CN tracks along the clivus?	CN 6
Which organ most likely metastasis to eye --	breast
Viritis: LEAST likely to cause: sarcoid, syphilis, histoplasmosis, toxoplasmosis	
Orbital medial portion fracture: what 3 structures affected the most?	Ethmoid, Lacrimal and Maxilla
Aqueous contains: proteins?/normal composition of aqueous?	NO PROTEINS bc TRANSPARENCY & BAB
painful bump on upper lid	Internal hordeolum (MG)
unilateral, red eye with watery discharge	viral
Lens sublux:	marfans, ehlers danlos, homocystinuria
KCN, megalocornea, lens subluxation (up & out), glaucoma, retinal detachments and carotid artery dissection	Marfan's Syndrome
Viscoelastic used in cataract sx: what portion will LEAST likely come into contact with VES?	posterior capsule
What type of eyelid disorder will cause pseudostrabismus? telecanthus? large epicanthal folds?	Large epicanthal folds
Ocular signs that can arise from atopic dermatitis	Inf. papillae, dennies line (extra lid fold d/t edema), KCN
Ocular signs of myotonic dystrophy	Christmas tree cataract (polychromatic lenticular deposits), band keratopathy, ptosis
Older patient with bilateral that move and then return back to normal position:	asteroid hyalosis or synchysis scintillans (bilateral!)
Which optic nerve will have least affect on IOP: papillitis, optic atrophy, papilledema etc.	
A patient that has a lesion on their eyelid and it had the key word “telangiectasia” --	BCC
A male is MOST likely to get a tumor or cancer in the eye that metastasized from where?	Liver
A woman with breast cancer and it said clivus, is most likely to metastasize to where?	Clivus is in the cavernous sinus so CN 6
The angular artery is a terminal branch of which of the following:	facial artery
A picture of different Aortic arches and it asked what was the correct branching out of it.	A for Aortic arch; B for RIGHT brachiocephalic; C for LEFT Carotid; S for LEFT subclavian
You stain with fluorescein and notice negative staining, What is the most likely reason?	EBMD
Which of the following occur in the stroma?	Meesman (epi), Reis Buckle (bowman’s), granular, ans was probs macular
A question about hassall henle bodies and asked in what layer do they occur i think or what it was associated with?	Peripheral Corneal Guttata on Decemet’s membrane
Patients tongue is moving towards the right side, what CN is affected?	Right CN XII
What type of retinal degeneration does every 8 year old have?	WWOP
Which sinus does the cav sinus drain into the	superior/inferior petrosal which then join the sigmoid sinus
Cells first to synapse without center receptive field (bipolar, amacrine, ganglion, etc.)	Photoreceptors do not have receptive fields
Form of glaucoma most common in elderly due to: appositional Iris approach, pigmented TM,	PXE or pupillary block bombe (appositional)
AAION damage to what other artery	spca
Something myelin sheath	oligodendrocytes
Choroidal melanoma...	primary metastasis
What passes through the SOF or CTR?	NOA and IOV
What is the only nerve that does not travel posterior to the globe	Optic Nerve
Layer of retina affected in commotio retinae	Photoreceptor outer segment
where is the lesion in a macular sparing homonymous hemianopsia	Meyer’s loop of occipital (dorsal region)
Lack of vitamin A → build up keratin on conjunctiva	Bitots spots
Light entering eye center is brighter than edge of pupil due to conical shape of cone photoreceptor outer segments	Stiles Crawford effect
TED, caroid cavernous fistula, orbital pseudotumor	proptosis
increased axial length (myopia/megalocornea), lens subluxation, glaucoma and heart defects (enlarged aorta)	Marfan's
Pick 3 symptoms for fistula	Bruit, pulsatile proptosis, chemosis
unilateral visual loss with a compressive optic atrophy in one eye and contralateral papilledema caused by increased intracranial pressure	Pseudo foster kennedy syndrome
Extra row of lashes	Distichiasis
MRI pointing to a muscle --	put SO
Which of the following is not caused by increased intracranial pressure?	Papillitis (also known as optic neuritis)
90 day glaucoma	CRVO
What passes through inferior orbital fissure?	IOF= inferior ophthalmic vein, infraorbital artery and vein (V2), zygomatic nerve, pterygopalatine
What passes through Superior orbital fissure?	SOF= 3, 4, 6, V1 (NFL)
Galactosemia…how can it affect the eye, cornea, or retina?	Lens swelling, cataracts
What is the main cause of down syndrome?	old age mother
Signs of allergic conjunctivitis:	Papillae, stringy secretions
What test do you do for trauma?	CT scan without contrast
Orbital cellulitis is an	ethmoid infection
10 yo with proptosis and fever =	orbital cellulitis
Crepitus, hypoesthesia, sub conj heme, no elevation, enophthalmos, (+)FDT	Floor fracture (MAXILLARY):
HLA B51- t cell mediated, acute anterior non granulotomatous, NO KP just mouth and genital warts- HLA B51 with urethral ulcers	Behcet
What CN passes lateral to the cav sinus?	CN 6
What do you do in a pt with eye down and out?	MRI or CT of brain w/o contrast
What is the blood supply for the RPE?	Choriocapillaris
Blood supply to foveola	Foveola- choriocapillaris
Blood supply to macula?	Macula- choriocapillaris and central retinal artery
Right homonymous hemi location:	Left occipital lobe
Picture of dense NS cataract and asked what is causing change in RX	Increased gradient index in the nucleus
Pt has cataracts and said they saw better post dilation. What cataract?	PSC
In normal patients during Jones testing when injecting into the lower canaliculi where does it immediately drain into?	Common canaliculi → lacrimal sac
Asked about what lymph nodes the medial and lateral drain into	Medial: submandibularLateral: Preauricular
Issues with fasciculus cuneatus	Proprioception to upper body (know if right or left side)
3 places with tight junctions	Retinal vascular endothelium RPE iris vasculature (Minor circle)
What can cause the look of pseudostrab	Epicanthal folds
EOMs that compensate for a left head turn	Left medial rectusRight lateral rectus
KCN (select 3)	Abnormal reflex, vertical striae, fleischer's ring
No direct or consensual response OD, consensual and direct OS	OD optic nerve
What causes or is associated with band keratopathy?	calcium on Bowmans
Select 3, what drains directly into right atrium	1. Superior 2. inferior vena cava 3. coronary sinus
Least useful for CSR diagnosis	FAF, OCT, amsler, swinging flashlight test
Perforated sclera	increased IOP
What comes from tunica vasculosa lentis?	Posterior lens capsule
POsterior remnant of hyaloid artery	Berrgmeisters papillae
Pigment on anterior lens capsule d/t trauma	Vossius ring
Know VF associated with blockages, multiple “pt had stroke, what artery is blocked”)	Middle cerebral artery
Spec reflection	Endothelium (gutatta)
What supplies foveola	Choroid
Cause of decreased vision in pt with pars planitits	CME, vitreoretinal traction, sensory retail detachment
Outer blood retinal barrier	Between RPE and endothelial cells lining the retinal vessels
What cranial nerve doesn’t provide sensory feedback from tongue	Hypoglossal (motor only)
Where is major circle located	Ciliary stroma
Pt with Chrons disease most likely had what	nongran uveitis
Not associated with GCA	Jaw claudication, fever, temporal pallor, neck stiffness (not GCA related)
30 y/o female. Transient vision loss occasionally, worse with exercise, then headache follows	blood pressure
Post likely associated with longstanding vitreous pulling on retina (select 4)	VMT, macular hole, ERM, peripheral retinal detachment
Receptor involved with MG	ACh
LOcation of intracranial hematoma	Within the brain or between brain and skull
Arcuate defect, what is the associated rim thinning (didnt specify which eye or where scotoma was)	I put inferior nasal
Asked about Mueller cells, i think what layers they are in the retina or what their function is	Stores glycogenExtend from ELM to ILM, not located in PR layer
Most common location for iris detachment (or whatever you call it) from trauma?	Iris root? (thinnest)
Lined by endothelium	1. Schlemms 2. corneal endo 3. iris vessels
Location bulbar conjunctiva is most securely attached	At fornices, where EOMs insert, at limbus
Precursor to beta-carotene	Vit A
What is seen first on OCT in bulls eye maculopathy	RPE
Toxoplasmosis most commonly spread	Eating uncooked meat or touching an infected cat or by mom
Blood aqueous barrier	1. NPCE 2. iris stroma (minor) 3. schlemm’s canal
Non fenestrated	Iris (minor) and retina vessels
Fenestrated	Major MACI (ciliary body) and choroid
Sudden vision loss w PDR?	RD
Stage 4 Mac hole pick 3	vit real tuft, hyperopic shift, watzke allen, cystic changes, pseudo operculum has broken off
Autoregulation	optic nerve head and sensory retina
Prolactinoma	Amenorrhea
What three systemic Dx cause blood clot	Thrombosis (blood clot), sickle cell, hemophilia (hella bleeding)
Optic nerve glioma-	apd and proptosis
Increase outflow glaucoma	Prostaglandins (uveo), brimonidine/apraclonidine (uveo), vyzulta, rhopressa, pilocarpine
Bulls eye deposits on anterior lens capsule 15% in 10 yearsIOP is more difficult to control!	PXE
posterior bowed iris, contact between iris and lens zonules, 15% in 15 years	PDS
Little to no autonomic function-	retina vessels
Space behind lens in posterior lens and anterior vitreous-	bergers space
Cornea- Lens- Iris root-	collagencrystallinethinnest
limbal of vogt	corneal regeneration
Connected to sclera-	choroid
Prk takes out-	epi bowman’s anterior stroma
Stroma-	corneal nerve endings
Posterior polymorphous-	vesicular lesions on DM
Location of hydrocephalus -	ventricles in brain; CSF is located between arachnoid and pia mater
