#separator:tab
#html:false
Glycolysis takes place where?	In the cytosol
Glycolysis net reactions? Products?	Glucose to 2 pyruvate, 2 ATP, 2 NADH
How many steps in glycolysis, what are they? What is the intermediates?	10 steps in glycolysis: 1. Transfer of phosphate group from ATP to glucose --  G-6P 2. Isomerization from Aldose to Ketose --  F-6P 3. Transfer of second phosphate group to fructose -- F-1,6P 4. C3-C4 bond cleavage -- DHAP and GAP 5. DHAP isomerizes to GAP -- 2 GAP [Steps 1-5 is the formation of 2 GAPs from glucose]   6. Oxidation and Phosphorylation - 1,3-BPG 7. Transfer of phosphate group to ADP, forming ATP -- 3-PG and ATP 8. Intramolecular phosphoryl-group transfer -- 2-PG 9. Dehydration to an energy-rich enol ester -- PEP 10. Another transfer of phosphoryl group to ADP- Pyruvate [Steps 6-10 is 2 glyceraldehyde 3-phosphates converted to 2 pyruvates]
How is lactate created? Why is this significant?	The NADH from glycolysis is used to reduce pyruvate into lactate. The oxidation of NADH allows for the regeneration of NAD+, balancing the equations and continuing the cycle.
How many ATP molecules are consumed in glycolysis for every one molecule of glucose? Which step?	2 ATP, in the Step 7 into 3-PG and Step 10 onto pyruvate 
Identify the isomerization reactions in glycolysis.	Step 2, from aldol-glucose to keto-fructose; Step 5, DHAP phosphate to GAP
Identify the reactions involving the transfer of a high-energy phosphoryl group to ADP, resulting in ATP.	Step 7, where 1,3-BPG transfer a phosphate group to form 3-PG, and Step 10, where PEP transfers another phosphate to form pyruvate
How many ATP molecules are generated from 1 glucose to 2 pyruvates?	2 net ATP: 4 are produced in total, 2 are consumed in the reaction
How are dietary carboxylates digested? What enzyme? What organ releases this enzyme? What is cleaved?	a-amylase cleaves 1,4 bonds in starch in the pancreas.
What cleaves 1,6 bonds in starch? (contrasting from 1,4 bonds cleaved by a-amylase)	α-dextrinase
How do pandas survive on bamboo? Why can't humans digest cellulose?	They have bacteria in their stomachs that produce cellulase that can break the beta-1,4 linkages.
How do disaccharides enter the glycosidic pathway? (Sucrose, lactose) Special case for fructose?	Sucrose and lactose are broken into their monosaccharides with enzymes.    Galactose is converted to glucose.    Fructose from adipose tissue gets a phosphoryl group through hexokinase. Fructose from liver tissue uses the F-1P pathway (cleaved to produce DHAP and GAP).
What is the fructose 1-phosphate pathway? What does it relate to?	Fructose 1-phosphate is cleaved to produce DHAP and GAP.  It relates to how Fructose from liver cells enters the glycolysis pathway.
What are the control points of glycolysis?	hexokinase, phosphofructokinase (PFK), pyruvate kinase
How is glycolysis regulated in muscle cells? In liver cells?	Regulation of glycolysis in muscle: the need for ATP (Energy charge: ATP/AMP ratio)   Regulation of glycolysis in the liver: blood glucose levels
What are the three allosteric enzymes in glycolysis? What does that mean?    In muscles, how are they inhibited?   Which one of these is the most important control point and why?	Hexokinase, PFK, and Pyruvate kinase. They regulate irreversible reactions.   Hexokinase is inhibited by G-6P, its immediate product. (known as a negative feedback loop) PFK is inhibited by energy charge, or ATP(-).   Pyruvate kinase is also inhibited by ATP(-).    PFK is the most important because PFK is the first committed step of glycolysis. After this step, the only choice is on to pyruvate.
What is the most important control point, and why?  In muscles, what is it inhibited by? What is it activated by? What is the activation called?	PFK, because it is PFK is the first committed step in glycolysis. After this step, the only choice is on to pyruvate.    PFK is inhibited by ATP (-) and is activated by AMP (+).    This activation is known as feedforward stimulation.
In the liver, how is PFK inhibited? Activated?	In general, the regulation of glycolysis in the liver by blood glucose levels.  Inhibited by citrate.   Activated by fructose 2,6- bisphosphate. (F- 2,6- BP)
How is glycolysis regulated in the liver? Explain the three control points.	PFK: inhibited by citrate, activated by F-2,6-P (high glucose) Glucokinase (hexokinase IV)- not regulated Pyruvate kinase: inhibited by ATP and alanine, activated by F-1,6-P, also inhibited by phosphrylation
Movement of glucose across the membrane, explain the two more important transports.	There are normally 5 transporters, all uniporters, there are two important ones.   GLUT2- in liver and pancreatic b cells Km = 15-20 mM  in liver, it removes excess sugar from blood  in pancreas, it regulates insulin   GLUT 4- in muscle and fat cells Km = 5 mM, between liver / pancreatic and basal glucose uptake
What does Km mean in a transporter? What does a low Km mean?	For transporter, KM is the concentration of the chemical transported that yields one-half maximal transport velocity.  Low Km means sensitive to glucose levels.
How do high glucose levels lead to the release of insulin? (4 steps)	1) When there is a high concentration of glucose in the blood, the concentration of ATP increases. 2)  ATP binds to a K+ ion channel and closes it. 3) When the membrane potential becomes depolarized, it opens a voltage-gated calcium ion channel, causing the concentration of Ca+2 ions to increase 4) The high concentration of Ca+2 binds to vesicles holding insulin, indicating the vesicle to move from the cytoplasm to the membrane to release insulin.
How does insulin affects muscles to reduce blood sugar levels?	Insulin binds to receptors and phosphorylates tyrosine kinase domains. This will induce a vesicle containing lots of GLUT4 transporters to attach to the surface, allow muscle cells to take glucose out of the bloodstream.
