#separator:tab
#html:false
What is a habitat	The place where an organism lives
What is a population	All the organisms of one species living in a habitat
What is a community	The populations of different species living in a habitat
What is an abiotic factor	A non living factor of the environment eg. Temperature
What is a biotic factor	A living factor of the environment eg. Food
What is an ecosystem	The interaction of a community of living organisms with the non living parts of their environment
What do organisms compete for	Plants - light, space, water and mineral ions from the soil Animals - space (territory), food, water, mates
What is interdependence	In a community, each species depends on other species for things such as food, shelter, pollination and seed dispersal - this is called interdependence
Why does a change in an environment have knock on effects	The interdependence of all living things in an ecosystem means any major change in the ecosystem, such as a species dying out, will have far reaching effects.
What are stable communities	Communities where all the species and environmental factors are in balance so that the population sizes are roughly constant (they may go up and down in cycles). For example tropical rainforests and ancient oak woodlands.
Give examples of abiotic factors	Moisture level Light intensity temperature carbon dioxide level (for plants) wind intensity and direction oxygen level (for aquatic animals) soil pH and mineral content
Give examples of biotic factors	New predators arriving Competition - one species may out compete and replace another new pathogens Availability of food
What are adaptations	Features or characteristics that allow an organism to survive
What are structural adaptations	Features of an organism's body structure such as shape or colour
What are behavioural adaptations	Ways that an organism behaves eg. migrating to warmer climates in the winter
What are functional adaptations	features affecting what goes on inside the organism's body that can be related to processes like reproduction and metabolism.
What are extremophiles	Microorganisms that are adapted to live in very extreme conditions such as high temperature, pressure or salt concentration. eg. Bacteria living in deep sea vents
What are food chains	Diagrams which represent feeding relationships in a community All food chains start with a producer which synthesizes molecules. This is usually a green plant or algae which makes glucose via photosynthesis. Producers are eaten by primary consumers, which are eaten by secondary consumers which are eaten by tertiary consumers.
What happens in a stable community containing prey and predators	The population of any species is limited by the amount of food available if the population of prey increases, so will the population of predators. This causes the number of prey to decrease, causing the number of predators to decrease. This means the number of prey can once again increase so the cycle repeats itself.
Why are predator prey cycles out of phase with each other	It takes a long time for one population to respond to changes in the other population
What is the distribution of an organism	Where that organism is found within its habitat. Environmental factors affect the distribution of organisms
How do you measure distribution	Measure how common an organism is in two sample areas and compare them Study how distribution changes across an area using a transect
What are quadrats	A quadrat is a square frame enclosing a known area eg. 1 m squared.
How do you measure distribution with quadrats	To measure distribution with quadrats, place quadrats at random points in two sample areas, count all the organisms in the quadrats, and work out the mean organisms per quadrat for each area Compare the two means
How do you work out the population of an organism in an area using quadrats	Use quadrats to randomly sample parts of the area Calculate a mean value of number of organisms per metre squared Multiply by total area
What are transects	Transects can be used to study the distribution of organisms. They are lines with quadrats placed at intervals along the line
How do you measure distribution with a transect	Lay out a line in the area you want to study using a tape measure. Then place quadrats at regular intervals eg. every metre along the line. Count the organisms in each quadrat and compare results as you go along the line
What do you do if you cannot count all the organisms in a quadrat	You can estimate percentage cover of a quadrat by that organism eg by overlaying a grid of squares on the quadrat and counting how many squares are filled by the organism
What environmental changes can affect distribution	Temperature Water availability Composition of atmospheric gases These can be caused by seasonal factors, geographic factors or human interaction
Describe the water cycle	Energy from the sun causes water to evaporate from the land and sea, turning it into water vapour. water also evaporates from plants in transpiration The warm water vapour is carried upwards then cools and condenses into clouds water falls from the clouds as precipitation onto land, where it provides fresh water for plants and animals It then drains into the sea, and the process restarts
Describe the carbon cycle	-Carbon dioxide is removed from the atmosphere by green plants and algae during photosynthesis. This carbon is used to make glucose, which is turned into carbohydrates, fats, cellulose and proteins -When plants and algae respire, some carbon is returned to the atmosphere as carbon dioxide -When plants and algae are eaten by animals, some carbon becomes part of fats and proteins. the carbon then moves through the food chain. -When animals respire, some carbon is returned to atmosphere as carbon dioxide -When plants, animals and algae die, animals and microorganisms feed on their remains. When these organisms respire, carbon is returned to the atmosphere. -Animals also produce waste that is broken down by animals and microorganisms -The combustion of wood and fossil fuels releases carbon dioxide back into the atmosphere -This means the carbon is constantly being cycled
Describe the cycle of decay	-Compounds and elements that plants/animals need to survive are passed up the food chain -these materials are returned to the environment as waste products, or when the organisms die and decay -Materials decay when they are digested by microorganisms -Decay returns these compounds and elements back to the soil -In a stable community, the materials taken out from the soil are balanced by the materials put back in.
What is decay	Decay is the breaking down (decomposition) of plant and animal material and waste by microorganisms.
What factors affect the rate of decay (and are needed for decay to take place)	Temperature Moisture Oxygen Decay organisms (microorganisms/detritus feeders)
What is compost	Compost is decomposed organic matter that is used as natural fertiliser for crops and garden plants
What is biogas	Biogas is gas produced by anaerobic decay of waste material Most biogas is methane
How is biogas made	Biogas is made in a simple fermenter called a digester or generator Biogas generators need to be kept at a constant temperature Biogas cannot be stored as a liquid (it needs too high a pressure) so must be used straight away
What are the two types of biogas generators	Continuous generators make biogas all the time. Waste is continuously fed in and biogas is produced at a steady rate. Batch generators make biogas in small batches. They are manually loaded up with waste which is left to digest, and byproducts are cleared away after each session. Both generators need an inlet for waste material to be put in, an outlet for digested material to be removed through and an outlet so the biogas can be piped to wherever needed.
What is biodiversity	The variety of different species of organisms on earth or within an ecosystem
Why is a high biodiversity important	It ensures that ecosystems are stable by reducing the dependence of one species on another for food, shelter and the maintenance of the physical environment
What human activities are reducing biodiversity and why is this bad	For the human species to survive it is important that a good level of biodiversity is maintained. Lots of human actions including waste production, deforestation and global warming are reducing biodiversity. However, its only recently that we have started taking measures to stop this from continuing.
Why is earth's population rising	Modern medicine and farming methods have reduced the number of people dying from disease and hunger.
What does the increasing population do to the environment	More raw materials and energy are used to make products for the increasing amount of people who also demand a higher standard of living. Many raw materials are being used up faster than they are being replaced. More waste is produced too. Unless waste and chemical materials are properly handled, more pollution will be caused.
In what ways can pollution occur	Water pollution - sewage and toxic chemicals from industry can pollute lakes, rivers and oceans, affecting the plants and animals that rely on them for survival. Chemicals used on lands eg. pesticides or fertilisers can be washed into water Land pollution - Toxic chemicals used for farming, nuclear waste buried underground, household waste dumped in landfills. Air pollution - Smoke and acidic gases released into the atmosphere can pollute the air eg. sulfur dioxide causes acid rain
What does pollution do	Pollution can kill plants and animals which can reduce biodiversity
What causes global warming	Greenhouse gases in the atmosphere eg. carbon dioxide and methane act like an insulating layer. They absorb most of the energy that would normally be radiated into space and re radiate some of it back to earth. This increases the earth's temperature. The earth is gradually heating due to increasing levels of greenhouse gases.
What are the consequences of global warming	Sea levels rising - higher temperatures cause seawater to expand and ice to melt, causing sea levels to rise. Low lying places will be flooded if this continues Changes in the distribution of species - As temperatures increase and rainfall changes, species may become more widely distributed or less widely distributed Changes in migration patterns - eg. some birds may migrate further north as more areas get warmer Reduction in biodiversity - Biodiversity could be reduced if some species are unable to survive a change in the climate and become extinct
What human processes use land	Building, quarrying, farming and dumping waste This means there is less land left for other organisms
Describe the destruction of peat bogs	Bogs are areas of land that are acidic and waterlogged. Plants that live in bogs dont fully decay when they die as there is not enough oxygen. The partially rotted plants build up to form peat. The carbon in the plants is stored in peat. However, peat bogs are often drained to be used as farmland, or peat is cut up and used as fuel or compost. When peat is drained, it comes into contact with air so microorganisms decompose it. This releases the carbon in the peat back into the atmosphere as carbon dioxide. The destruction of peat bogs also destroys the habitats of some animals, plants and microorganisms, so reduces biodiversity.
What is deforestation	The cutting down of forests, often on a large scale.
Why is deforestation done	To clear land for farming to produce more food To grow crops which biofuels based on ethanol can be produced from
What are the consequences of deforestation	Less carbon dioxide taken in - less trees means less carbon dioxide is removed from the atmosphere when photosynthesis occurs. Trees trap some of the carbon they absorb in their wood which can remove it from the atmosphere for hundreds of years More carbon dioxide in the atmosphere - carbon dioxide released when trees are burnt to clear land. Microorganisms feeding on bits of dead wood release carbon as a waste product of respiration. Less biodiversity - Habitats like forests contain a huge number of different species of plants and animals, so when they are destroyed many species can become extinct, reducing biodiversity.
What are breeding programs	Endangered animals are bred in captivity to make sure the species survives if it dies out in the wild. Individuals can be released into the wild to boost or re establish a population.
What is habitat protection	Programs to protect and regenerate rare habitats like mangroves, heathland and coral reefs have been started. Protecting these habitats protect the species that live there - preserving the ecosystem and biodiversity. There are programs to reintroduce hedgerows and field margins around fields on farms where only a single type of crop is grown. Field margins are areas where wildflowers and grasses are left to grow. These provide a habitat for a wider variety of organisms than single crop fields.
What programmes are in place to prevent global warming	regulations to reduce the level of deforestation taking place and the amount of carbon dioxide being released by businesses.
What waste reduction programs are in place	People are encouraged to recycle to reduce the amount of waste dumped in landfill sites. This could reduce the amount of land taken over for landfill, leaving ecosystems in place.
What pressures affect how biodiversity is maintained	The costs of programs The effect on the local economy - less jobs means people move away Protecting food security - pests are killed and this damages biodiversity The development of society - land is in such high demand that land with high biodiversity has to be used for development
What programmes are in place to maintain biodiversity	Breeding programmes Habitat protection Preventing Global Warming Reducing waste
What are trophic levels	The different stages of a food chain. They consist of one or more organisms that perform a specific role in the food chain.
What is trophic level 1	Contains producers - organisms that make their own energy from the sun
What is in trophic levels 2, 3, and 4	2 - primary consumers - herbivores that eat plants and algae 3 - secondary consumers - carnivores that eat primary consumers 4 - Tertiary consumers - carnivores that eat other carnivores (secondary consumers). Carnivores that have no predators are at the top of the food chain, so they are in the highest trophic level. These are know as apex predators
How do decomposers break down dead plant and animal matter	They secrete enzymes that break the dead stuff down into small soluble food molecules. These then diffuse into the microorganisms
What do pyramids of biomass show	The relative amount of biomass at each level of a food chain
How much energy from the sun is transferred by photosynthesis	Green plants and algae transfer ~1% of the incident energy of light that hits them during photosynthesis
How much biomass from a level is transferred to the level above it	approx. 10%
Why is biomass lost between trophic levels	Organisms do not always eat every single part of the organism they are consuming, so not all biomass is passed on to the next stage of the food chain Organisms do not absorb all of the stuff in the food they ingest - some of it is egested as faeces Some of the biomass taken is is converted to other substances that are lost as waste. Organisms use lots of glucose for respiration to provide energy for movement and warmth instead of making more biomass. This process produces lots of waste carbon dioxide and water. Urea is another waste product.
What is biomass	Biomass is mass of living material - it is the stored energy inside and organism/ population/ community.
What is food security	Having enough food to feed a population
What biological factors affect food security	-The increasing birth rate of many developing countries means an increase in population -Changing diets in developed countries means there is high demand for certain foods to be imported from developing countries. Already scarce food resources become even more scarce. -New pests and pathogens or changes in environmental conditions result in loss of crops and livestock and can lead to famine -High input costs of farming make it too expensive for people in some countries to start or maintain food production, so there are sometimes not enough people producing food in those areas to feed people -Conflicts in parts of the world affect the availability of food and water.
Why are sustainable methods of food production needed	All people now and in the future need to be fed without using resources faster than they renew.
What is overfishing	Too much fishing means fish stocks are declining in oceans. This means there are fewer fish for us to eat, the oceans food chains are affected and some species of fish may disappear in some areas. Fish stocks need to be maintained at a level where the fish continue to breed - this is sustainable food production.
How are fish stocks conserved	Fishing quotas - limits on the number and size of fish that can be caught in some areas, preventing some species from being overfished. Net size - limits on the mesh size of fish nets, depending on what is being fished. This reduces the number of unwanted and discarded fish that are accidentally caught. Using a bigger mesh size lets unwanted species escape, and means younger fish slip through the net, allowing them to reach breeding age.
How can food production be made more efficient	-Limiting the movement of livestock and keeping them in a temperature controlled environment reduces transfer of energy from livestock to environment, so more energy is available for growth, so more food produced from same resource input -Livestock like calves and chickens can be factory farmed. Fish can be factory farmed in cages. -Some animals are fed high protein food to increase their growth. However factory farming leads to easy spread of disease and there are ethical objections
What is biotechnology	Where living things and biological processes are used and manipulated to produce a useful product.
How is bacteria genetically engineered to produce human insulin	1.Plasmid removed from bacterium 2.Insulin gene cut out of human chromosome using a restriction enzyme. Restriction enzymes recognise specific sequences of DNA and cut the DNA at these points. This cut leaves one of the DNA strands with unpaired bases called the sticky end 3.Plasmid cut open using same restriction enzyme leaving same sticky end 4.plasmid and human insulin gene mixed together 5.Ligase (an enzyme) is added. This joins the sticky ends together to produce recombinant DNA 6.Recombinant DNA inserted into a bacterium 7.Modified bacterium grown in a vat under controlled conditions. End up with millions of insulin producing bacteria. Insulin can be harvested and purified to treat diabetics.
What is mycoprotein	Mycoprotein is made from the fungus fusarium, which is grown in aerobic conditions on glucose syrup. The fungal mass is harvested and purified to produce mycoprotein. Mycoprotein is used to make high protein meat substitutes for vegetarian meals.
How can crops be genetically modified	GM crops can be produced that are resistant to pests, improving crop yields They can be modified to grow better in drought conditions, increasing yields Some crops can be modified to provide more nutritional value eg. Golden Rice has been genetically engineered to produce a chemical that is converted in the body to vitamin A
What are arguments against genetically modified crops	People go hungry because they cannot afford to buy food, not because there is not enough. Some argue you need to tackle poverty first. There are fears that countries may become dependent on companies selling GM seeds Sometimes poor soil is the main reason crops fail, and even GM crops wont survive
