#separator:tab
#html:false
What is the tunica externa of a blood vessel made of?	Areolar CT
Helps prevent dramatic swings of BP as the ventricles contract and relax.	Compliance and elastic recoil.
What kind of blood vessels are often called the resistance vessels?	Arterioles.
Distal end of a metarteriole is called a _____.	Thoroughfare channel.
What is the most common type of capillary.	Continuous Capillaries.
What type of capillary is found in the red bone marrow, liver, spleen, and anterior pituitary gland?	Sinusoids: Large fenestrations.
Capacitance or reservoir vessels because they accomodate extra blood with little change in BP.	Veins
Venous Return is promoted by:	1. Skeletal Muscle Pump 2. Venous Valves 3. Gravity 4. Respiratory Pump
T/F: At rest, the majority of our blood is stored in systemic arteries.	False: At rest, the majority (64%) of our blood is stored in the systemic veins and venules.
The Three methods of movement of substances between capillaries and tissues:	1. Diffusion: most important method of capillary exchange. 2. Transcytosis: Active transport. 3. Bulk flow: Passive transport of a large number of ions and molecules.
What are the two pressures that promote filtration?	1. Blood Hydrostatic pressure 2. Interstitial fluid osmotic pressure
Starling's Law of Capillaries:	In homeostatic tissues, the volumes of fluid and solutes reabsorbed and filtered are almost equal.
T/F: More fluid leaves the arterial end of a capillary then is reabsorbed at the venous end.	True
How much excess tissues fluid is drained by the lymphatic capillaries each day?	Around 3 Litres.
Possible causes of Edema:	- Increase BP - Increase in permeability of capillaries - Decrease in concentration of plasma proteins (decrease in BCOP) - Increase in IFOP
Velocity is ______ proportional to total cross-sectional area of each type of blood vessel.	Inversely
The distrubution of blood flow to various tissues depends on what two factors:	1. The pressure difference (gradient). 2. The resistance to blood flow.
Three Factors that Directly Affect Blood Pressure:	1. Velocity/rate of blood flow 2. Total Blood Volume 3. Resistance of blood flow
What is normal arterial BP?	120mmHg/80mmHg
What is the formula for pulse pressure?	Pulse Pressure = systolic BP - diastolic BP
How is arterial BP measured?	Using a sphygmomanometer to listen for Korotkoff sounds (turbulent and laminar flow of blood).
What are the two formulas regarding MAP?	MAP = diastolic BP + 1/3 (systolic BP - diastolic BP)  BP (MAP) = CO x R
T/F: Resistance is inversely proportional to the radius of a blood vessel.	True
What are some causes of increased blood viscosity?	Dehydration, untreated diabetes mellitus, or decrease in ADH (both increase urine output).
1Kg of weight gain = ___ km of extra blood vessels	650km
Where are the cardiac centers that control BP located?	Medulla oblongata
What are the two types of receptors that moniter arterial BP?	Baroreceptors: Detect changes in BP Chemoreceptors: Detect changes in O2, CO2, and H+.
Which hormone is the only endocrine hormone that lowers BV, CO, R, and BP?	Atrial Natriuretic Peptide (ANP).
What affect does ADH have on BP?	It increases BP.
What inflammatory chemical causes vasodilation, and subsequently a decrease in R, CO, and BP?	Histamine: made by basophils and mast cells.
What is the affect of vasovagal response (i.e. increased parasympathetic stimulation) or increase in ACh?	A decrease in HR, contractility, SV, R, and BP.
What is the affect of atherosclerosis on stroke volume?	Decreases SV, because of decreased pre-load.
Name the two arteries that supply the cerebral arterial circle (Circle of Willis):	- Verterbral Arteries - Internal Carotid arteries
What neonatal structure does the ductus venosus turn into?	The ligamentum venosum.
What fetal structure was the ligamentum teres?	The umbilical vein.
T/F: The cardiac reserve would be lower in a well trained athlete than a sedentary individual.	False
Which phase lasts longest during an action potential in a ventricular contractile fiber?	The refractory phase lasts longest.
1. Have desmosomes which help to hold the muscle fibers together. 2. Have gap junctions which allow action potentials to conduct from one muscle fiber to the next.	The intercalated discs seen in cardiac myocytes.
Describe the phases of the cardiac cycle in correct order.	Atrial Contraction - Isovolumetric Contraction - Ventricular Ejection - Isovolumetric relaxation - Ventricular Filling - Atrial Contraction
