#separator:tab
#html:false
What is crude oil?	Crude oil is a mixture of compounds; a fossil fuel consisting of the remains of  ancient biomass. Finite resource - cannot be replaced as it is used up.
Crude oil is a mixture of compounds; a fossil fuel consisting of the remains of  ancient biomass. Finite resource - cannot be replaced as it is used up.	What is crude oil?
What is a hydrocarbon?	A compound made up exclusively of hydrogen and carbon atoms
A compound made up exclusively of hydrogen and carbon atoms	What is a hydrocarbon?
What are alkanes?	Saturated hydrocarbons of a general formula CnH2n+2
Saturated hydrocarbons of a general formula CnH2n+2	What are alkanes?
What is a homologous series??	Series of compounds with same general formula, same functional groups and similar chemical properties.
Series of compounds with same general formula, same functional groups and similar chemical properties.	What is a homologous series??
Describe the combustion of hydrocarbons	Exothermic reaction occurring when hydrocarbons are reacted with oxygen. - Complete combustion produces carbon dioxide and water (carbon and  hydrogen atoms are completely oxidised). - Incomplete combustion produces carbon or carbon monoxide and water.
Exothermic reaction occurring when hydrocarbons are reacted with oxygen. - Complete combustion produces carbon dioxide and water (carbon and  hydrogen atoms are completely oxidised). - Incomplete combustion produces carbon or carbon monoxide and water.	Describe the combustion of hydrocarbons
Describe the physical properties of alkanes	- The first few in series are gases, then change to liquids, then to solids.  - In general, boiling points and viscosity increase as molecules get bigger. - Volatility and flammability decrease as molecules get bigger. - Poor reactivity.
- The first few in series are gases, then change to liquids, then to solids.  - In general, boiling points and viscosity increase as molecules get bigger. - Volatility and flammability decrease as molecules get bigger. - Poor reactivity.	Describe the physical properties of alkanes
Explain how fractional distillation of crude oil takes place	Crude oil is heated and vaporised. - Vapor rises up the fractionating column (tower). - The column is hotter at the bottom and cooler at the top. - Hydrocarbons cool as they go up the column and condense at different heights, as they have different boiling points. - Large molecules, high boiling points - collected at the bottom. - Small molecules, low boiling points - collected at the top. - This gives fractions, which can be used in various ways.
Crude oil is heated and vaporised. - Vapor rises up the fractionating column (tower). - The column is hotter at the bottom and cooler at the top. - Hydrocarbons cool as they go up the column and condense at different heights, as they have different boiling points. - Large molecules, high boiling points - collected at the bottom. - Small molecules, low boiling points - collected at the top. - This gives fractions, which can be used in various ways.	Explain how fractional distillation of crude oil takes place
What is cracking?	When large hydrocarbons are thermally broken down into smaller and useful  molecules
When large hydrocarbons are thermally broken down into smaller and useful  molecules	What is cracking?
What type of reaction is cracking?	Thermal decomposition
Thermal decomposition	What type of reaction is cracking?
What are the conditions for cracking?	Reactant heated to vapor, passed over a hot catalyst (catalytic cracking) or heated to vapor, mixed with steam and heated to high temperatures (steam cracking)
Reactant heated to vapor, passed over a hot catalyst (catalytic cracking) or heated to vapor, mixed with steam and heated to high temperatures (steam cracking)	What are the conditions for cracking?
How are the products of cracking used?	The products are alkanes and alkenes – used as polymers and starting materials for synthesis.
The products are alkanes and alkenes – used as polymers and starting materials for synthesis.	How are the products of cracking used?
What is an alkene?	Unsaturated hydrocarbon. Contains a C=C bond.  General formula for alkenes is:  CnH2n.
Unsaturated hydrocarbon. Contains a C=C bond.  General formula for alkenes is:  CnH2n.	What is an alkene?
What is the test for alkenes?	Add bromine water. Colour change occurs from orange to colourless.
Add bromine water. Colour change occurs from orange to colourless.	What is the test for alkenes?
Describe the combustion of alkenes	They burn with smoky flames due to incomplete combustion
They burn with smoky flames due to incomplete combustion	Describe the combustion of alkenes
Describe addition reactions of alkenes	Addition atoms across the carbon-carbon double bond so that the double bond becomes a single carbon-carbon bond. a) With hydrogen - hydrogenation; requires a higher temperature and a nickel catalyst b) With steam - hydration; requires high temperature, pressure, and  concentrated phosphoric acid (H3PO4) as a catalyst c) With Br2/Cl2/I2  - addition of halogens
Addition atoms across the carbon-carbon double bond so that the double bond becomes a single carbon-carbon bond. a) With hydrogen - hydrogenation; requires a higher temperature and a nickel catalyst b) With steam - hydration; requires high temperature, pressure, and  concentrated phosphoric acid (H3PO4) as a catalyst c) With Br2/Cl2/I2  - addition of halogens	Describe addition reactions of alkenes
What is an alcohol?	An organic compound that contains an -OH functional group
An organic compound that contains an -OH functional group	What is an alcohol?
State characteristics of methanol, ethanol, propanol and butanol	- Dissolve in water to form a neutral solution. - React with sodium to form hydrogen. - Burn in oxygen. - React with carboxylic acids in presence of acid catalyst to form esters.
- Dissolve in water to form a neutral solution. - React with sodium to form hydrogen. - Burn in oxygen. - React with carboxylic acids in presence of acid catalyst to form esters.	State characteristics of methanol, ethanol, propanol and butanol
Oxidation of the alcohols leads to...?	Carboxylic acids
Carboxylic acids	Oxidation of the alcohols leads to...?
What are some uses of alcohols?	- Fuels - Solvents  - Drinks
- Fuels - Solvents  - Drinks	What are some uses of alcohols?
State the conditions required for fermentation of glucose and state  the equation of the reaction	30 degrees Celsius, aqueous solution of the glucose, absence of air, yeast added;  C6H12O6 → 2 CH3CH2OH + 2 CO2
30 degrees Celsius, aqueous solution of the glucose, absence of air, yeast added;  C6H12O6 → 2 CH3CH2OH + 2 CO2	State the conditions required for fermentation of glucose and state  the equation of the reaction
What are carboxylic acids?	Organic compounds that contain a COOH functional group
Organic compounds that contain a COOH functional group	What are carboxylic acids?
State characteristics of carboxylic acids	Dissolve in water to form an acidic solution (contains H+ ions)  - React with metal carbonates to form carbon dioxide  - React with alcohols with an acid catalyst to produce esters - React with metals to give off hydrogen gas
Dissolve in water to form an acidic solution (contains H+ ions)  - React with metal carbonates to form carbon dioxide  - React with alcohols with an acid catalyst to produce esters - React with metals to give off hydrogen gas	State characteristics of carboxylic acids
What type of acid is carboxylic acid?	It is a weak acid.
It is a weak acid.	What type of acid is carboxylic acid?
Explain why carboxylic acids are weak acids?	They are partially dissociated in water, thus the pH of a carboxylic acid in  solution is not as low as a solution of a strong acid of the same  concentration.
They are partially dissociated in water, thus the pH of a carboxylic acid in  solution is not as low as a solution of a strong acid of the same  concentration.	Explain why carboxylic acids are weak acids?
What is an ester and how is it formed?	An organic compound containing a -COO- functional group, formed from  carboxylic acid and alcohol in the presence of a sulfuric acid catalyst. They have a fruity smell.
An organic compound containing a -COO- functional group, formed from  carboxylic acid and alcohol in the presence of a sulfuric acid catalyst. They have a fruity smell.	What is an ester and how is it formed?
What is a polymer? How do molecules containing C=C bond form polymers?	A polymer is a long chain molecule which is made by lots of smaller molecules joining together. C=C bonds open up and many smaller molecules (monomers) join together to form a chain (a polymer). No other products are made. It is called an “addition polymerisation” reaction.
A polymer is a long chain molecule which is made by lots of smaller molecules joining together. C=C bonds open up and many smaller molecules (monomers) join together to form a chain (a polymer). No other products are made. It is called an “addition polymerisation” reaction.	What is a polymer? How do molecules containing C=C bond form polymers?
Give 3 examples of addition polymers and their uses.	Polyethene - plastic bags (Poly)tetrafluoroethene (PTFE) - teflon surfaces, for use in non-stick kitchenware (Poly)chloroethene (polyvinylchloride, PVC) - water pipes
Polyethene - plastic bags (Poly)tetrafluoroethene (PTFE) - teflon surfaces, for use in non-stick kitchenware (Poly)chloroethene (polyvinylchloride, PVC) - water pipes	Give 3 examples of addition polymers and their uses.
What is a repeating unit of a polymer?	It is a smallest structure which, upon numerous translations, yields the structure of the polymer. In addition polymers: to draw it, take a monomer, change C=C to C-C and show additional single bonds extending away from these carbons.
It is a smallest structure which, upon numerous translations, yields the structure of the polymer. In addition polymers: to draw it, take a monomer, change C=C to C-C and show additional single bonds extending away from these carbons.	What is a repeating unit of a polymer?
What is a condensation polymer?	It is a polymer made in condensation polymerisation. In this reaction, many molecules join together; the polymer is formed, but also a small molecule is released, e.g. H2O, HCl. Polyesters, e.g. terylene. Polyamides, e.g. Nylon.
It is a polymer made in condensation polymerisation. In this reaction, many molecules join together; the polymer is formed, but also a small molecule is released, e.g. H2O, HCl. Polyesters, e.g. terylene. Polyamides, e.g. Nylon.	What is a condensation polymer?
What is an amide bond?	An amide bond is similar to the ester bond, with O replaced by N, e.g. (C=O)-NH2 Just like an ester, it contains the C=O group.
An amide bond is similar to the ester bond, with O replaced by N, e.g. (C=O)-NH2 Just like an ester, it contains the C=O group.	What is an amide bond?
What is an amino acid?	It is an organic compound that contains both a carboxylic acid functionality  (COOH) and an amine functional group (-NH2).
It is an organic compound that contains both a carboxylic acid functionality  (COOH) and an amine functional group (-NH2).	What is an amino acid?
How do amino acids make proteins? What are polypeptides?	By numerous condensation polymerisation reactions; proteins are polymers made of amino acids (monomers). *Polypeptides are also made by condensation polymerisation of amino acids, but are shorter than proteins. One could think about proteins as a product of many polypeptide chains bonded together.
By numerous condensation polymerisation reactions; proteins are polymers made of amino acids (monomers). *Polypeptides are also made by condensation polymerisation of amino acids, but are shorter than proteins. One could think about proteins as a product of many polypeptide chains bonded together.	How do amino acids make proteins? What are polypeptides?
What are carbohydrates?	They are organic molecules made of C,H, and O. They are biologically relevant, e.g. starch and cellulose
They are organic molecules made of C,H, and O. They are biologically relevant, e.g. starch and cellulose	What are carbohydrates?
What is DNA? Describe its role and structure.	DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) is a material that makes up chromosomes - cell structures that store genetic information. DNA is made of two polymer chains that are held together in a double helix. Each polymer chain can be made from 4 different monomers - nucleotides.
DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) is a material that makes up chromosomes - cell structures that store genetic information. DNA is made of two polymer chains that are held together in a double helix. Each polymer chain can be made from 4 different monomers - nucleotides.	What is DNA? Describe its role and structure.
