#separator:tab
#html:false
What is a pure substance?	A pure substance is a single element or compound, not mixed with any other  substance
A pure substance is a single element or compound, not mixed with any other  substance	What is a pure substance?
What is a formulation and how is it made? Give examples	- A formulation is a mixture of compounds in measured quantities that has been designed as a useful product.  - Formulations include fuels, cleaning agents, paints, medicines, alloys,  fertilisers and foods. - E.g. alloys are mixtures of metals; they are harder than pure metals, so have  a particular purpose.
- A formulation is a mixture of compounds in measured quantities that has been designed as a useful product.  - Formulations include fuels, cleaning agents, paints, medicines, alloys,  fertilisers and foods. - E.g. alloys are mixtures of metals; they are harder than pure metals, so have  a particular purpose.	What is a formulation and how is it made? Give examples
Describe paper chromatography.	a) A start line is drawn near the bottom of the paper. The mixture is spotted on the line.  b) A beaker is filled with small amount of solvent (it cannot touch or go above the start line when paper is placed in a beaker) c) Paper is hung on a rod and placed in a beaker.  d) Solvent travels up the paper, thus separating the components. e) Before solvent level reaches the end, the paper is taken out and the finish line is marked. The paper is dried.  f) The procedure works when different compounds have different affinities for the solvent/paper. Stronger attraction for the paper - travels slowly with the solvent etc. g) Paper is called the stationary phase - it doesn’t move. Solvent is the mobile phase.
a) A start line is drawn near the bottom of the paper. The mixture is spotted on the line.  b) A beaker is filled with small amount of solvent (it cannot touch or go above the start line when paper is placed in a beaker) c) Paper is hung on a rod and placed in a beaker.  d) Solvent travels up the paper, thus separating the components. e) Before solvent level reaches the end, the paper is taken out and the finish line is marked. The paper is dried.  f) The procedure works when different compounds have different affinities for the solvent/paper. Stronger attraction for the paper - travels slowly with the solvent etc. g) Paper is called the stationary phase - it doesn’t move. Solvent is the mobile phase.	Describe paper chromatography.
How is Rf calculated?	Distance moved by the spot / distance moved by solvent
Distance moved by the spot / distance moved by solvent	How is Rf calculated?
In a paper chromatography experiment, a compound A was found to have an Rf value of 0.85 - what does it tell you about the compound?	It has a higher affinity for the solvent than for the paper.
It has a higher affinity for the solvent than for the paper.	In a paper chromatography experiment, a compound A was found to have an Rf value of 0.85 - what does it tell you about the compound?
Describe the tests for hydrogen, oxygen, carbon dioxide and chlorine	Hydrogen – pop with burning splint over gas Oxygen – glowing splint relights  Carbon dioxide – turns limewater (Ca(OH)2) milky  Chlorine – bleaches damp litmus paper and makes it white
Hydrogen – pop with burning splint over gas Oxygen – glowing splint relights  Carbon dioxide – turns limewater (Ca(OH)2) milky  Chlorine – bleaches damp litmus paper and makes it white	Describe the tests for hydrogen, oxygen, carbon dioxide and chlorine
Describe the flame test results	Lithium compounds– crimson red flame  Sodium compounds - yellow flame  Potassium compounds - lilac flame  Calcium compounds – orange red flame  Copper compounds -green flame.
Lithium compounds– crimson red flame  Sodium compounds - yellow flame  Potassium compounds - lilac flame  Calcium compounds – orange red flame  Copper compounds -green flame.	Describe the flame test results
Describe the sodium hydroxide test results and write the equations	Copper(II) forms a blue precipitate: Cu2+(aq) + 2OH−(aq) → Cu(OH)2(s) Iron(II) forms a dirty green precipitate: Fe2+(aq) + 2OH−(aq) → Fe(OH)2(s) Iron(III) forms a brown precipitate: Fe3+(aq) + 3OH−(aq) → Fe(OH)3(s) Al3+, Ca2+, Mg2+ form white precipitates  but only the Al(OH)3 dissolves in excess NaOH to form a colourless solution. Ca2+(aq) + 2OH−(aq) → Ca(OH)2(s) Mg2+(aq) + 2OH−(aq) → Mg(OH)2(s) Al3+(aq) + 3OH−(aq) → Al(OH)3(s)
Copper(II) forms a blue precipitate: Cu2+(aq) + 2OH−(aq) → Cu(OH)2(s) Iron(II) forms a dirty green precipitate: Fe2+(aq) + 2OH−(aq) → Fe(OH)2(s) Iron(III) forms a brown precipitate: Fe3+(aq) + 3OH−(aq) → Fe(OH)3(s) Al3+, Ca2+, Mg2+ form white precipitates  but only the Al(OH)3 dissolves in excess NaOH to form a colourless solution. Ca2+(aq) + 2OH−(aq) → Ca(OH)2(s) Mg2+(aq) + 2OH−(aq) → Mg(OH)2(s) Al3+(aq) + 3OH−(aq) → Al(OH)3(s)	Describe the sodium hydroxide test results and write the equations
Describe the test for carbonate anions	Add dilute acid, e.g. HCl Fizzing observed, as CO2 is released. E.g. Na2CO3 + 2 HCl → 2 NaCl + H2O + CO2
Add dilute acid, e.g. HCl Fizzing observed, as CO2 is released. E.g. Na2CO3 + 2 HCl → 2 NaCl + H2O + CO2	Describe the test for carbonate anions
Describe sulfate tests and give an equation	Add a solution containing Ba2+ cations, e.g. a solution of BaCl2 White precipitate of BaSO4 forms E.g. K2SO4 + BaCl2 → 2 KCl + BaSO4 (!!!) can also be thought of a test for barium (II); add sulfates - white precipitate forms.
Add a solution containing Ba2+ cations, e.g. a solution of BaCl2 White precipitate of BaSO4 forms E.g. K2SO4 + BaCl2 → 2 KCl + BaSO4 (!!!) can also be thought of a test for barium (II); add sulfates - white precipitate forms.	Describe sulfate tests and give an equation
Describe silver nitrate tests and give equations	Add a solution of AgNO3 (acidified with HNO3) Chlorides - white precipitate, silver chloride; Ag+ + Cl− → AgCl Bromides - cream precipitate, silver bromide; Ag+ + Br− → AgBr Iodides - yellow precipitate, silver iodide; Ag+ + I− → AgI
Add a solution of AgNO3 (acidified with HNO3) Chlorides - white precipitate, silver chloride; Ag+ + Cl− → AgCl Bromides - cream precipitate, silver bromide; Ag+ + Br− → AgBr Iodides - yellow precipitate, silver iodide; Ag+ + I− → AgI	Describe silver nitrate tests and give equations
What are instrumental methods?	They are accurate, sensitive and rapid methods which are useful when the amount of sample is very small
They are accurate, sensitive and rapid methods which are useful when the amount of sample is very small	What are instrumental methods?
Describe the flame emission spectroscopy	a) instrumental method used for identifying metal ions in solution or measuring their concentration b) Spectroscope measures the exact wavelength of the light emitted by a metal ion c) That allows for definite identification - sometimes colours are difficult to  distinguish. d) Concentrations are found by measuring the intensity of light emitted. The more intense light, the greater the concentration of the metal ion in a solution. e) From the intensity vs concentration graph, you can read off a relevant  concentration value at a given intensity.
a) instrumental method used for identifying metal ions in solution or measuring their concentration b) Spectroscope measures the exact wavelength of the light emitted by a metal ion c) That allows for definite identification - sometimes colours are difficult to  distinguish. d) Concentrations are found by measuring the intensity of light emitted. The more intense light, the greater the concentration of the metal ion in a solution. e) From the intensity vs concentration graph, you can read off a relevant  concentration value at a given intensity.	Describe the flame emission spectroscopy
What are cations and anions?	Cations are the positive ions; anions are the negative ions.
Cations are the positive ions; anions are the negative ions.	What are cations and anions?
