#separator:tab
#html:false
Clinical Chemistry    Glucose Renal Threshold	160-180 mg/dL
Clinical Chemistry    Proinsulin is converted to Insulin by the removal of:	C-peptide
"Clinical Chemistry    Known as ""favism"""	G6PD Deficiency
Clinical Chemistry    Glucose 6 phosphatase deficiency	"Glycogen Storage Disease Ia = ""Von Gierke"""
Clinical Chemistry    amylo-1,4 glucosidase(acid maltase/acid alpha-glucosidase) deficiency	"Glycogen Storage Disease II = ""Pompe"""
Clinical Chemistry    amylo-1,6 glucosidase(debranching enzyme) deficiency	"Glycogen Storage Disease III = ""Cori-Forbes"""
Clinical Chemistry    amylopectinase(glycogen branching enzyme) deficiency	"Glycogen Storage Disease IV = ""Andersen"""
Clinical Chemistry    muscle phosphorylase deficiency	"Glycogen Storage Disease V = ""McArdle"""
Clinical Chemistry    liver glycogen phosphorylase deficiency	"Glycogen Storage Disease VI = ""Hers"""
Clinical Chemistry    phosphofructokinase deficiency	"Glycogen Storage Disease VII = ""Tarui"""
Clinical Chemistry    glycogen transporter 2 deficiency	"Glycogen Storage Disease XI = ""Fanconi-Bickel"""
Clinical Chemistry    glycogen synthase deficiency	Glycogen Storage Disease Type 0
Clinical Chemistry    Deficiency of these enzymes lead to Galactosemia	glactose-1-phosphate uridyl transferase galactokinase UDP galactose-4-epimerase
Clinical Chemistry    Random Plasma Glucose >= 200mg/dL FBS > 125mg/dL 2hour point OGTT >= 200mg/dL	Diabetes mellitus
Clinical Chemistry    Onset of DM during pregnancy	Gestational Diabetes Mellitus
Clinical Chemistry    Standard OGTT glucose load	75 grams
Clinical Chemistry    OGTT glucose load for children	1.75g/kg body weight up to 75g
Clinical Chemistry    Three forms of glycated/glycosylated hemoglobin	HbA1a, HbA1b, HbA1c
Clinical Chemistry    Attachment of glucose to HbA1 is: a. Reversible b. Irreversible	b. Irreversible
Clinical Chemistry    Main form of Glycosylated Hb	HbA1c
Clinical Chemistry    Reflects long term blood glucose for the previous 2-3 months	HbA1c
Clinical Chemistry    Reflects short term blood glucose for the previous 2-3 weeks	Fructosamine
Clinical Chemistry    Specimen of choice for glycosylated Hb	non-fasting, whole blood in EDTA
Clinical Chemistry    Reference method for glucose analysis	Hexokinase-G6PD method
Clinical Chemistry     Nelson-Somogyi:  a. Copper reduction  b. Ferric reduction c. Condensation d. Enzymatic	a. Copper reduction
Clinical Chemistry    Folin-Wu  a. Copper reduction  b. Ferric reduction c. Condensation d. Enzymatic	a. Copper reduction
Clinical Chemistry    Neocupreine:   a. Copper reduction  b. Ferric reduction c. Condensation d. Enzymatic	a. Copper reduction
Clinical Chemistry    Hagedorn-Jensen:   a. Copper reduction  b. Ferric reduction c. Condensation d. Enzymatic	b. Ferric reduction
Clinical Chemistry    o-toluidine method:   a. Copper reduction  b. Ferric reduction c. Condensation d. Enzymatic	c. Condensation
Clinical Chemistry    Glucose oxidase method:   a. Copper reduction  b. Ferric reduction c. Condensation d. Enzymatic	d. Enzymatic
Clinical Chemistry    Give the Indicator enzyme for hexokinase and the measured product	G6PD, NADPH
Clinical Chemistry    Molecular bonds in TAGs	ester bonds
Clinical Chemistry    Endogenous TAG Transporter	VLDL
Clinical Chemistry    Exogenous TAG Transporter	Chylomicrons
Clinical Chemistry    Carrier for Cholesterol	HDL, LDL
Clinical Chemistry    Lipid that is a major constituent of the cell membrane	Phospholipid
Clinical Chemistry    2 forms of cholesterol	Esterified & Free
Clinical Chemistry    Accounts to 70% of total cholesterol	Cholesterol Ester
Clinical Chemistry    Transitional form of VLDL	IDL = Intermediate Density Lipoproteins
Clinical Chemistry    Mainly contains apoprotein B-48	Chylomicron
Clinical Chemistry    Mainly contains apolipoprotein B100	VLDL, LDL
Clinical Chemistry    Mainly contains apolipoprotein B199	IDL
Clinical Chemistry    Composed of 50% protein, 28% phospholipid, 19% cholesterol and 3% TAG	HDL
Clinical Chemistry    SinkingPrebeta Lipoprotein	Lp(a)
Clinical Chemistry    Floating beta lipoprotein	Beta VLDL
Clinical Chemistry    NCEP value for HDL (Low risk)	>=60mg/dL
Clinical Chemistry    NCEP cut off value for normal TAG level	150mg/dL
Clinical Chemistry    Chemical Methods for Cholesterol	Liebermann-Burchardt Salkowski reaction
Clinical Chemistry    End product and color of Liebermann-Burchardt	Cholestadienyl monosulfonic acid; green
Clinical Chemistry    End product and color of Salkowski reaction	Cholestadienyl disulfonic acid; red
Clinical Chemistry    TAG to VLDL conversion factor in Friedewald equation (in mg/dL and mmol/L)	TAG(mg/dL) / 5  TAG(mmol/L) / 2.2
Clinical Chemistry    deposition of glucocerebroside in RES	Gaucher's Disease
Clinical Chemistry    Accumulation of sphingomyelin in lysosomes	Niemann-Pick
Clinical Chemistry    Protein that maintains the colloidal oncotic pressure	Albumin
Clinical Chemistry    AKA transthyretin	Prealbumin
Clinical Chemistry    heme transport protein	hemopexin
Clinical Chemistry    Protein that predicts the risk of premature birth. Normal constituent of placenta and amniotic fluid	Fibronectin.
Clinical Chemistry    Give 3 stains used in Serum Protein Electrophoresis	Amido Black Ponceau S Coomassie Brilliant Blue
Clinical Chemistry    Zone electrophoresis based on pI of proteins	Isoelectric Focusing
Clinical Chemistry    Color rxn in Biuret Method requires at least _ peptide bonds and is measured at ___nm	2; 540
Clinical Chemistry    Most specific dye for albumin in the dye binding method	Bromcresol Purple
Clinical Chemistry    Most commonly used dye in dye binding method	Bromcresol green
Clinical Chemistry    First protein marker to rise in Acute MI	Myoglobin
Clinical Chemistry    Most specific protein marker for acute MI	cardiac Troponin I and C
Clinical Chemistry    Cardiac marker that rises in response to ventricular volume expansion and pressure overload	BNP (Brain Natriuretic Peptide)
Clinical Chemistry    Where Brain Natriuretic Peptide is first isolated	Porcine Brain (Brain of Pigs)
Clinical Chemistry    Tumor Marker that is a Lewis blood group antigen	CA 19-9
Clinical Chemistry    2 Tumor Markers to monitor breast CA px	CA 15-3, 27-29
Clinical Chemistry    Used to monitor(not diagnose) ovarian Tumor	CA-125
Clinical Chemistry    Marker to identify hepatocellular CA	AFP
Clinical Chemistry    Identifies colorectal CA	CEA
Clinical Chemistry    associated with trophoblastic tumors	hCG
Clinical Chemistry    PSA is a. Tissue specific, not tumor specific b. Not tissue specific, tumor specific c. Both tissue and tumor specific d. Neither tissue nor tumor specific	a. Tissue specific, not tumor specific  NB: It is also elevated in benign prostatic hypertrophy
Clinical Chemistry    Type of inhibition wherein the inhibitor binds to an allosteric site	Non-competitive Inhibition
Clinical Chemistry    Type of inhibition wherein the inhibitor binds to the Enzyme-Substrate complex	Uncompetitive Inhibition
Clinical Chemistry    Measurement of Enzyme must be done when the reaction is at the a. Zero Order Kinetics b. First Order Kinetics c. Second Order Kinetics	a. Zero Order Kinetics
Clinical Chemistry    Lactate dehydrogenase contains _ subunits and has _ isoenzyme types	4, 5
Clinical Chemistry    2 LDH isoenzymes used as Cardiac Marker (American System).	LD1, LD2
Clinical Chemistry    Forward Method of LDH Testing: Give the name of the method and the type of measurement	Wacker Method Increase in absorbance due to the production of NADH
Clinical Chemistry    Reverse Method of LDH Testing: Give the name of the method and the type of measurement	Wrobleuski and La Due Decrease in absorbance due to production of NAD+ from NADH
Clinical Chemistry    Most pronounced elevation of CK is found in px with this disease	Duchenne's muscular dystrophy
Clinical Chemistry    Highest Elevation of AST and ALT	Acute Viral Hepatitis
Clinical Chemistry    Coenzyme of AST and ALT	Pyridoxal 5 phosphate (P5P)
Clinical Chemistry    From what substance is the coenzyme of AST and ALT derived?	Vitamin B6 (pyridoxine)
Clinical Chemistry    Enzyme that is an indicator of  hepatobiliary obstruction	Alkaline Phosphatase
Clinical Chemistry    Highest elevation of ALP	Paget's Disease (osteitis deformans)
Clinical Chemistry    2 Abnormal forms of ALP (Carcinoplacental ALP)	Regan and Nagao
Clinical Chemistry    This enzyme is increased in Breast Cancer with Bone Metastasis	AcP (Acid Phosphatase)
Clinical Chemistry    Method for assessment of GGT	Szaz assay
Clinical Chemistry    aka Salivary Amylase	ptyalin
Clinical Chemistry    aka Pancreatic Amylase	amylopsin
Clinical Chemistry    Fastest migrating Amylase	Salivary Amylase
Clinical Chemistry    Early Marker of Acute Pancreatitis	Amylase
Clinical Chemistry    Specific Marker for Acute Pancreatitis	Lipase
Clinical Chemistry    Cherry - Crandall Method uses ____ as substrate and is used to test for what enzyme?	Olive oil(triolein); Lipase
Clinical Chemistry    Lipase activity is dependent upon: 1. Surface area of substrate 2. Presence of colipase   a.1 b.2 c.1&2 d.neither	c.1&2
Clinical Chemistry    aka acylcholine acylhydrolase   a. Acetylcholinesterase b. Pseudocholinesterase	b. Pseudocholinesterase
Clinical Chemistry    aka Acetylcholine acetylhydrolase   a. Acetylcholinesterase b. Pseudocholinesterase	a. Acetylcholinesterase
Clinical Chemistry    Specimen for assessment of G6PD deficiency	Red Cell Hemolysate
Clinical Chemistry    Normal BUN:Crea Ratio	10:1 - 20:1
Clinical Chemistry    BUN to Urea Conversion Factor	2.14(mg/dL)Urea / (mg/dL)BUN or 0.357(mmol/L)Urea / (mg/dL)BUN
Clinical Chemistry    Conversion of Urea to Ammonia is due to:	Urease
Clinical Chemistry    Chemical Method for Urea Analysis uses:	Diacetlymonoxime
Clinical Chemistry    Chemical Method for BUA Analysis	Caraway Method aka Phosphotungstic Acid Method
Clinical Chemistry    The action of uricase on uric acid produces:	Allantoin
Clinical Chemistry    Product of AA deamination which is then converted to urea	Ammonia
Clinical Chemistry    Specimen for NH3 analysis: 1. collected with heparin or EDTA 2. placed in ice 3. Have a decreased value in hepatic failure and Reye's syndrome  a.1,2,3 b.1,2 c.1,3 d.2,3	b.1,2
Clinical Chemistry    Renal Threshold for Sodium	110-130mmol/L
Clinical Chemistry    Schales and Schales Method uses ___ as indicator. It is a test for ____	Diphenylcarbazone; Chloride
Clinical Chemistry    Principle of Schales and Schales	Mercurimetric Titration
Clinical Chemistry    Principle of Cotlove chloridometer	Coulometry
Clinical Chemistry    ISE for chloride uses:	Ag with AgCl
Clinical Chemistry    Hypokalemia is seen in:   a. Acidosis b. Alkalosis	b. Alkalosis   H+ goes out, K+ goes in the cell
Clinical Chemistry    Toxicology: Odor of bitter almond:	Cyanide poisoning
Clinical Chemistry    Toxicology: Odor of garlic:	Arsenic poisoning
Clinical Chemistry    What do you call the reversible exchange process betwee HCO3- and Cl-	Chloride Shift
Clinical Chemistry    Defined as the amount of enzyme that converts 1 micromole of substance per minute	IU
Clinical Chemistry    Defined as the amount of substance that converts 1 mole per second	katal
Clinical Chemistry    An equation that is the expression of the pH Bicarbonate-Carbonic Acid Buffer System	Henderson-Hasselbach equation
Clinical Chemistry    Flipped LDH Pattern   a. LD1>LD2 b. LD1<LD2 c. LD1=LD2	a. LD1>LD2
Clinical Chemistry    Toffy Crystal	Monosodium urate
Clinical Chemistry    Characterized by orange sand in diaper in babies	Lesch-Nyhan Syndrome
Clinical Chemistry    Activator of Amylase	Calcium and Chloride
Clinical Chemistry    Activator of CK	Magnesium
Clinical Chemistry    Activator of Alkaline/Acid Phosphatases	Calcium
Clinical Chemistry    Activator of LDH	Zinc
Clinical Chemistry    Major NPN	Urea
Clinical Chemistry    Anticoagulant that inhibits enolase	Sodium fluoride
Clinical Chemistry    Normal conc. of TP in spinal fluid relative to serum CHON is	<1%
Clinical Chemistry    Conversion factor for glucose determination in SI Units	0.055 mmol/L / mg/dL
Clinical Chemistry    Anion gap: (eqn)	AG = (Na+K) - (Cl+HCO3) or AG = Na - (Cl+HCO3)
Clinical Chemistry    SPS inhibits __, __ and ___	Complement, Cellular Activity, Humoral Activity
Clinical Chemistry    Conversion Factor mg/dL bilirubin to micromol/L	17.1 micromol/L / mg/dL
Clinical Chemistry    State the Henderson Hesselbach equation	pH = 6.1+log(HCO3/H2CO3)
Clinical Chemistry    Formula: H2CO3 from pCO2	pCO2 * 0.03
Clinical Chemistry    Formula: HCO3- from H2CO3 and TCO2	HCO3- = TCO2 - H2CO3
Clinical Chemistry    VLDL from DeLong's equation is calculated by(in mg/dL and mmol/L):	mg/dL: TAG/6.5 mmol/L: TAG/2.8
Clinical Chemistry    The forms of Calcium and Magnesium that are biologically active	Ionized calcium / Ionized Magnesium
Clinical Chemistry    Calcium analysis reference method	AAS
Clinical Chemistry    Decrease divalent cations can cause:	Tetany  NB: Divalent cations = Ca and Mg
Clinical Chemistry    Sodium ISE membrane	glass
Clinical Chemistry    ISE: Potassium carrier molecule	Valinomycin
Clinical Chemistry    aka cholecalciferol	Vitamin D
Clinical Chemistry    Form of cholecalciferol that is used by humans	Vitamin D3
Clinical Chemistry    Active form of vitamin D	1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol
Clinical Chemistry    Highest increase in LDH is found in:	Pernicious Anemia
Clinical Chemistry    Gold standard for GFR	Inulin Clearance
Clinical Chemistry    every 1% of HbA1c excess is equivalent to added __ mg/dL of plasma glucose	35 mg/dL
Clinical Chemistry    Most labile enzyme at low temperature:	LDH  NB: It is stable at room temperature for 48hrs
Clinical Chemistry    Protein fraction unique in CSF	Tau Transferrin
Clinical Chemistry    Lipid Profile:	Total Cholesterol TAG LDL HDL
Clinical Chemistry    Phosphorus has a/an ___ relationship with Calcium a. inverse b. direct	a.Inverse
Clinical Chemistry    In the ammonium molybdate method for phosphate analysis, the phosphomolybdate complex is read at ___ while Molybdenum blue is read at ___	340nm; 600-700nm
Clinical Chemistry    aka Ammonium molybdate method for P	Fiske Subarrow Method
Clinical Chemistry    What do you call the regular value fluctuation exhibited by serum iron	diurnal variation
Clinical Chemistry    Iron: storage protein	Ferritin
Clinical Chemistry    Iron: transport protein	Transferrin
Clinical Chemistry    The only index increased in Iron Deficiency Anemia	Total Iron Binding Capacity
Clinical Chemistry    product of glucose fermentation	lactate
Clinical Chemistry    Type of Lactic Acidosis caused by metabolic processes	Type B
Clinical Chemistry    Type of Lactic Acidosis caused by decreased oxygen levels	Type A
Clinical Chemistry    substance with the greatest effect in osmolality	Sodium
Clinical Chemistry    Enumerate the four colligiative properties of a solution	1. Boiling point 2. Freezing point 3. Osmotic pressure 4. Vapor pressure
Clinical Chemistry    Most used principle in osmometers	freezing point depression
Clinical Chemistry    Serum osmolality reference range:	275-295 mOsm/kg
Clinical Chemistry    2 organs responsible for pH control	Kidney, Lungs
Clinical Chemistry    Ratio of bicarbonate to carbonic acid	20:1
Clinical Chemistry    Catalyzes the conversion of Carbon dioxide to Carbonic acid and subsequently, bicarbonate ions	Carbonic anhydrase
Clinical Chemistry    Biochemically active form of an enzyme	holoenzyme
Clinical Chemistry    Carbonic acid to Bicarbonate ratio	1:20
Clinical Chemistry    Primary cause of Alkalosis	Hyperventilation
Clinical Chemistry    Electrode for ABG oxygen measurement	Clark electrode
Clinical Chemistry    Electrode for ABG carbon dioxide measurement	Severinghaus
Clinical Chemistry    Releation of mean, median and mode in a normalized distribution	mean=median=mode
Clinical Chemistry    Electrophoresis: oligoclonal bands seen in CSF ONLY is indicative of	Multiple sclerosis
Clinical Chemistry    Fire classification: Arsenal fire	Class E
Clinical Chemistry    Fire classification: electrical fire	class C
Clinical Chemistry    Fire classification: fats oil and grease fire	Class K
Clinical Chemistry    Conversion Factor: Creatinine mg/dL to micromol/L	88.4 micromol/L / mg/dL
Clinical Chemistry    Conversion Factor: T4 ng/dL to pmol/L	12.9 pmol/L / ng/dL
Clinical Chemistry    Serum Separator gel:	Thixotropic gel
Clinical Chemistry    Catalyzes bilirubin conjugation	UDP(uridine diphosphate) glucuronyl transferase
Clinical Chemistry    Deficiency in UDP glucuronyl transferase	Crigler Najjar Syndrome
Clinical Chemistry    Brain deposition of unconjugated bilirubin	Kernicterus
Clinical Chemistry    Intake of aspirin following a viral infection can cause:	Reye's syndrome
Clinical Chemistry    Enzyme marker for cholestasis	ALP
Clinical Chemistry    Jendrassik-Grof method. SPM: the ___ colored product is measured at ___	green-blue; 600nm
Clinical Chemistry    Jendrassik-Grof method uses___ as accelerator	caffeine-sodium benzoate
Clinical Chemistry    Principle for bilirubin determination	Diazotization
Clinical Chemistry    Substances that can cause erroneous results in Urobilinogen measurement	Porphobilinogen and Ehrlich-reactive substances
Clinical Chemistry    A catecholamine that inhibits prolactin release	Dopamine
Clinical Chemistry    Inhibits GH and TSH secretion	Somatostatin
Clinical Chemistry    aka Somatoliberin/Somatocrinin	Growth hormone-releasing hormone
Clinical Chemistry    Stimulates prolactin release	TRH
Clinical Chemistry    Where ADH and Oxytocin are produced	Hypothalamus
Clinical Chemistry    Where ADH and Oxytocin are stored	Posterior Pituitary Gland
Clinical Chemistry    The axons of these group of neurons are where Oxytocin is stored	paraventricular nucleus
Clinical Chemistry    The axons of these group of neurons are where Vasopressin is stored	Supraoptic nucleus
Clinical Chemistry    Major Mineralocorticoid	Aldosterone
Clinical Chemistry    Major Glucocorticoid	Cortisol
Clinical Chemistry    Aldosterone production is controlled by	Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system
Clinical Chemistry    Converts Angiotensinogen to Angiotensin I	Renin
Clinical Chemistry    Converts Angiotensin I to Angiotensin II	Angiotensin Converting Enzyme
Clinical Chemistry    Where ACE is found	Surface of the lung and kidney epithelium
Clinical Chemistry    End product of Epinephrine, Norepinephrie metabolism	Vanillylmandelic acid
Clinical Chemistry    End product of dopamine metabolism	homovanillic acid
Clinical Chemistry    Malignant tumor of the adrenal medulla	Neuroblastoma
Clinical Chemistry    Base molecule of catecholamine synthesis	Tyrosine
Clinical Chemistry    Most potent female sex hormone	Estradiol
Clinical Chemistry    Estrogen fraction that is very elevated in pregnancy.	Estriol
Clinical Chemistry    Most potent Androgen	Testosterone
Clinical Chemistry    Precursor of all estrogens	Androgen
Clinical Chemistry    Feedback mechanism seen in childbirth	Positive feedback (oxytocin)
Clinical Chemistry    Feedback mechanism for hormone regulation	Negative feedback
Clinical Chemistry    Major protein carrier for Thyroid hormone	Thyroid binding globulin
Clinical Chemistry    Hormone that causes increase gastric HCl secretion	Gastrin
Clinical Chemistry    condition caharacterized by elevated gastrin level usually due to tumor	Zollinger-Ellison Syndrome
Clinical Chemistry    Base molecule for Serotonin synthesis	tryptophan
Clinical Chemistry    Confirmatory Test for Drugs	GC-MS
Clinical Chemistry    Normal Value: PCO2	35-45 mmHg
Clinical Chemistry    Normal Value: PO2	80-100 mmHg
Clinical Chemistry    Normal Value: Bicarbonate	21-26 mmol/L
Clinical Chemistry    Normal Value: pH	7.35-7.45
Clinical Chemistry    Binding protein for acidic drugs	Albumin
Clinical Chemistry    Binding protein for basic drugs	Alpha-1 acid glycoprotein
Clinical Chemistry    How many doses should the drug be taken to assess peak and trough drug levels	4-7 doses
Clinical Chemistry    Reference method for alcohol measurement	Gas-liquid chromatography
Clinical Chemistry    Method to measure cyanide	ISE
Clinical Chemistry    Method to measure Arsenic	AAS
Clinical Chemistry    Method to measure Salicylate	Trinder reaction
Clinical Chemistry    Visible light spectrum:	400-700 nm
Clinical Chemistry    Principle in spectrophotometry	Beer's law
Clinical Chemistry    Measurement of light scattering	Nephelometry
Clinical Chemistry    Measurement of the decrease in transmitted light through a solution	Turbidimetry
Clinical Chemistry    Polarography employs an:	electrochemical cell
Clinical Chemistry    ISE: Carrier for ammonium	nonactin and monactin
Clinical Chemistry    based on Faraday's law   a. Amperometry b. Potentiometry c. Coulometry d. Electrophoresis	c. Coulometry
Clinical Chemistry    What machine quantitates fractionated protein in electrophoresis?	densitometer
Clinical Chemistry    Principle of Clark Electrode	Amperometry
Clinical Chemistry    Principle of Severinghaus electrode	Voltametry
Clinical Chemistry    Model of enzyme kinetics wherein the rate of enzyme reaction is dependent upon substrate concentration	Michaelis-Menten kinetics
Clinical Chemistry    What is the constant in the Michaelis Menten equation that signifies the substrate concentration at which the reaction rate is half of the maximum achievable by the system	Km or the Michaelis Constant
Clinical Chemistry    Appearance of jaundice within 24 hours post partum; Serum Bilirubin > 18 mg/dL   a. Physiologic jaundice b. Pathologic jaundice	b. Pathologic jaundice   NB: Physiologic jaundice appears after 24 hours
Clinical Chemistry    The most important equation of electrochemistry. Used to calculate the potential of an ion across a membrane.	Nernst Equation
Clinical Chemistry    True for sweat test: 1. Measurement for chloride 2. Sweat is induced by pilocarpine 3. Screening test for cystic fibrosis   a.1,2  b.2,3  c.1,2,3  d.1,3	c.1,2,3
Clinical Chemistry    Which of tests these are not elevated in hemolysis? A. Potassium B. LDH C. AST D. Bilirubin	D. Bilirubin
Clinical Chemistry    It is the rate controlling enzyme of the pentose phosphate pathway / hexose monophosphate shunt   A. Hexokinase B. G6PD C. Pyruvate kinase D. Enolase	B. G6PD
Clinical Chemistry    An enzyme that is part of the Embden-Meyerhof pathway. A deficiency of this results in chronic hemolytic anemia   A. Glucose oxidase B. G6PD C. Pyruvate kinase D. Acetyl-CoA dehydrogenase	C. Pyruvate kinase
Clinical Chemistry    Also known as the Embden-Meyerhof Pathway   A. Glycolysis B. Pentose phosphate pathway C. Urea Cycle D. Gluconeogenesis	A. Glycolysis
Clinical Chemistry    Transport protein for copper	Ceruloplasmin
Clinical Chemistry    Deficiency of Ceruloplasmin which causes progressive lenticular degeneration and copper accumulation	Wilson's disease
Clinical Chemistry    Dark rings that encircle the iris of the eye due to copper deposition	Kayser-Fleischer ring
Clinical Chemistry    Reduced glutathione is used to combat oxidative stress. It is maintained at a reduced state by _____ generated by what enzyme?	NADPH; G6PD
Clinical Chemistry    What enzyme class cleaves a chemical bond without the addition of water?	Lyases
Clinical Chemistry    What do you call a renal calculus formed by precipitation of minerals potentiated by Proteus infection	Struvite
Clinical Chemistry    Conversion factor: mEq/L to mmol/L of monovalent electrolytes	1.0
Clinical Chemistry    Which of these are differential between Type 1 and Type 2 diabetes mellitus:   A. C-peptide B. Auto-antibodies C. Both D. None	C. Both
Clinical Chemistry    Reference method for total protein	Kjeldahl Method
Clinical Chemistry    Method for Ammonia measurement	Conway method
Clinical Chemistry    2 tests for ALP fractionation	Heat Stability & Electrophoresis
Clinical Chemistry    Pathologic isozenzymes Nagao and Regan are similar to what normal isoenzyme	Placental
Clinical Chemistry    ALP alkaline electrophoresis: list the fractions from the most anodal to the least	Liver, Bone, Placental, Intestinal
Clinical Chemistry    ALP Heat Stability: What is the most heat labile	Bone
Clinical Chemistry    In CK and LDH, which reaction is faster? a. Forward b. Reverse	b. Reverse
Clinical Chemistry    Specimen glucose loss at room temperature:	5-7 mg/dl/hour
Clinical Chemistry    Specimen glucose loss at 4 degrees Celsius	2 mg/dl/hour
Clinical Chemistry    Product of incomplete glucuronization	Bilirubin monoglucoronide
Clinical Chemistry    Bilirubin:UDP-GT ratio in incomplete glucuronization	1:1
Clinical Chemistry    Bilirubin:UDP-GT ratio in complete glucuronization	1:2
Clinical Chemistry    Converts galactose to glucose	galactose-1-PO4-uridyltransferase
Clinical Chemistry    Enzyme that converts NH3 to Urea	Ornithine carbamyl transferase
Clinical Chemistry    Transport protein of bilirubin in the liver	ligandin and Z protein
Clinical Chemistry    Conjugated bilirubin in serum can be bound to albumin producing:	biliprotein or delta bilirubin
Clinical Chemistry    Defective transport of bilirubin in the entire liver tissue due to deficient ligandin and Z protein	Gilbert's syndrome
Clinical Chemistry    Defective excretion of bilirubin in stool and urine because of canalicular damage of the hepatic system	Dubin Johnson syndrome
Clinical Chemistry    Defective excretion of bilirubin due to viral etiology	Rotor's syndrome
Clinical Chemistry    Colorimetric reaction for measurement of nitrogenous substances	Nesslerization
Clinical Chemistry    What do you call the substance when sulfanilic acid is dissolved in nitrous acid	diazotized sulfanilic acid
Clinical Chemistry    How many minutes should diazotized sulfanilic acid and the specimen be incubated WITHOUT accelerator/solubilizing agent to measure Unconjugated bilirubin	30 minutes
Clinical Chemistry    Indirect Van den Bergh reaction measures:	Total bilirubin
Clinical Chemistry    Unconjugated Bilirubin is a:  a. measured value b. calculated value	b. calculated value
Clinical Chemistry    Formula for % Diagnostic Sensitivity	"(# diseased indiv. with positive test / Total # of diseased indiv. tested) x 100"
Clinical Chemistry    Formula for % diagnostic specificity	"(# of indiv without the disease with negative test / Total # of indiv without the disease) x 100"
Clinical Chemistry    Test used to determine whether there is a statistically significant difference between SD of two groups of data	F test
Clinical Chemistry    Kind of statistics used to compare the means or SD of two groups of data	Inferential Statistics
Clinical Chemistry    The difference between the value of a data point and the mean value divided by the group's SD	Standard Deviation Index  NB: SDI = (x - mean) / SD
Clinical Chemistry    Chart that compares the results obtained by one specimen on the abscissa from the other specimen on the ordinate	Youden/Twin Plot
Clinical Chemistry    Used to measure systematic errors or inaccuracy caused by substances other than the analyte	Interference experiment
Clinical Chemistry    Concentration range over which the measured concentration is equal to the actual concentration without modification of the method	Linear/Dynamic Range
Clinical Chemistry    It shows whether the method measures all the analytes or only a part of it. It estimates inaccuracy or systematic error	Recovery experiments
Clinical Chemistry    It is the possibility that a positive test indicates disease	Positive predictive value
Clinical Chemistry    It is the probability that a negative test indicates the absence of disease	
Clinical Chemistry    Planck's formula	E = hv
Clinical Chemistry    Range of wavelengths accurately measured when using Alumina Silica Glass	350-2000 nm
Clinical Chemistry    Internal Standard for FES	Lithium/Cesium
Clinical Chemistry    Internal Standard in AAS	None/Not Needed
Clinical Chemistry    Used to stabilize complexes with phosphate in AAS	Lanthanum/Strontium chloride
Clinical Chemistry    In electrophoresis, the stronger the ionic strength of the buffer, the ______ the movement of the proteins  A. Faster B. Slower	B. Slower
Clinical Chemistry    The resulting data obtained from GC-MS is termed as:	Fragmentogram
Clinical Chemistry    Detects 20 inborn errors of metabolism from a single blood spot	Tandem Mass Spectroscopy (MS/MS)
Clinical Chemistry    Kind of planar chromatography used in drug screening	TLC
Clinical Chemistry    Most used Liquid Chromatography	High Performance Liquid Chromatography
Clinical Chemistry    Complementary Method to GC-MS which is sued to confirm positive results from screening of illegal drugs.	Liquid Chromatography - Mass Spectroscopy
Clinical Chemistry    Type of chromatography based on relative solubility between two liquids.	Partition chromatography
Clinical Chemistry    The equation primarily used in Polarography	Ilkovic equation
Clinical Chemistry    Measurement of the differences in current at a constant voltage	Polarography
Clinical Chemistry    Type of voltametry for Pb and Fe testing	Anodic stripping voltametry
Clinical Chemistry    Glassware that is a special alumina silcate glass that has been strengthened chemically rather than thermally.	Corex
Clinical Chemistry    Glassware utilized for high thermal shock and extreme chemical treatment with acids and dilute alkali	Vycor
Clinical Chemistry    Methods used to verify pipette volume accuracy and precision	Gravimetric and Spectrometric methods
Clinical Chemistry    Substance used to compare the reproducibility of brands of pipette tips	0.1% phenol red
Clinical Chemistry    Cleaning solution for glassware	Acid dichromate (Potassium dichromate in nitric or sulfuric acid)
Clinical Chemistry    In the following tests, which of these have a diurnal variation in which it is has a LOWER level during MORNINGS  Cortisol, ACTH, Renin, Aldosterone Insulin, GH, AcP, T4, Prolactin, Fe, Ca	GH, AcP
Clinical Chemistry    Test used to determine whether the ulnar artery is capable of adequate perfusion if the radial artery is occluded	Modified Allen Test
Clinical Chemistry    Tube that is not used to collect blood in tests for Therapeutic Drug Monitoring	Tubes with gel separators  NB: Gels absorb certain drugs
Clinical Chemistry    Anticoagulant of Fluoride tubes	Potassium oxalate
Clinical Chemistry    Length of the skin puncture lancet	1.75mm
Clinical Chemistry    Which anticoagulants interfere with most BUN measurements?	Fluoride and Oxalate
Clinical Chemistry    Heparin causes a false increase in which of these parameters  A. pO2 B. pCO2	B. pCO2
Clinical Chemistry    Versene is known as:	K2EDTA
Clinical Chemistry    Sequestrene is known as:	K3EDTA
Clinical Chemistry    Ideal specimen for Potassium measurement	Heparinized Plasma  NB: Serum induces a false increase of K because of K release during clotting.
Clinical Chemistry    Respinning of gel tubes can cause false increase of which electrolyte?	Potassium
Clinical Chemistry    Also known as Insulin Like Growth Factor	Somatomedin
Clinical Chemistry    Deep rapid respiration characteristic of diabetic acidosis	Kussmaul-Kien respiration
Clinical Chemistry    Diagnostic criteria for hypoglycemia	Whipple's Triad
Clinical Chemistry    Ratio of Beta hydroxybutyrate to acetoacetate in severe DM	6:1
Clinical Chemistry    aka Brittle Diabetes	Type 1 DM
Clinical Chemistry    A person with autoantibodies directed against these 2 substances would make that person develop DM Type1.	Glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD65) and Insulin
Clinical Chemistry    autoantibody more common among children with DM Type 1	Anti Insulin
Clinical Chemistry    autoantibody more common among adults with DM Type 1	GAD65
Clinical Chemistry    aka Stable Diabetes	DM Type 2
Clinical Chemistry    Untreated Type 2 DM patients with glucose >300mg/dL may result to:	Nonketotic hyperosmolar coma
Clinical Chemistry    The difference between arterial and venous glucose levels	7 mg/dL
Clinical Chemistry    Reagent for Folin Wu	Phosphomolybdate
Clinical Chemistry    Reagent for Nelson-Somogyi Copper Reduction	Arsenomolybdate
Clinical Chemistry    End result for Neocuproine Method	Yellow or Yellow Orange
Clinical Chemistry    Benedict's Method is a modification of:	Folin Wu
Clinical Chemistry    Dose in IV Glucose Tolerance Test	0.5g glucose / kg body weight
Clinical Chemistry    Dietary requirement of OGTT	>150g of carbohydrates/day 3 days prior to testing
Clinical Chemistry    One of the diagnostic criteria for DM is for HbA1c to have a value of:	>= 6.5%
Clinical Chemistry    Measurement of HbA1c is done using an NGSP certified method. What is the meaning of NGSP	National Glycohemoglobin Standardization Program
Clinical Chemistry    Prediabetes levels of HbA1c	5.7-6.4%
Clinical Chemistry    Most common enzyme deficiency in patients with galactosemia	galactose-1-phosphate uridyl transferase
Clinical Chemistry    Autosomal recessive disorder characterizd by fructokinase deficiency	Essential fructosuria
Clinical Chemistry    Defect of fructose 1-6-biphosphate aldolase B activity	Hereditary fructose intolerance
Clinical Chemistry    Types of GSD that causes muscular defect	5&7 (Andersen and Tarui)
Clinical Chemistry    Normal Beta hydroxybutyrate to acetoacetate ratio	1:1
Clinical Chemistry    aka Lecithin	Phosphatidylcholine
Clinical Chemistry    The only phospholipid in membranes not derived from glycerol but from sphingosine	sphingomylein
Clinical Chemistry    Cholesterol is A. Hydrophilic B. Hydrophobic C. Amphipathic	C.Amphipathic  NB: Contains both hydrophobic and hydrophilic structures
Clinical Chemistry    Esterification of Cholesterol to form Cholesterol Ester and Lysolecithin is done by what enzyme?	Lecithin Cholesterol Acyl Transferase
Clinical Chemistry    Activator of LCAT	Apo-A1
Clinical Chemistry    Excess cholestero is re-esterified by what microsomal enzyme?	Acyl:cholesterol acyl transferase
Clinical Chemistry    Bloors/Two Step Method in Cholesterol measurement employs what steps?	Extraction and Colorimetry
Clinical Chemistry    CDC Reference Method for Cholesterol Measurement utilizes what steps?	Saponification, Extraction, Colorimetry
Clinical Chemistry    CDC Reference Method for Cholesterol Measurement uses what saponifying agent and what color reagent	alc.KOH ; Liebermann-Burchardt rgt
Clinical Chemistry    Triacylglycerol is: A.Hydrophilic B. Hydrophobic C. Amphipathic	B.Hydrophobic
Clinical Chemistry    Breakdown of TAG is facilitated by what enzyme?	Lipoprotein lipase
Clinical Chemistry    Liebermann Burchardt Reagent is composed of:	Glacial Acetic Acid Acetic anhydride Concentrated H2SO4
Clinical Chemistry    CDC Reference Method for TAG measurement	Modified Van Handel and Zilversmith
Clinical Chemistry    A structural motif in apolipoproteins that gives proteins the ability to bind to lipids	Amphipathic Helix
Clinical Chemistry    What vitamin depends solely upon lipoproteins fro absorption and delivery	Vitamin E
Clinical Chemistry    Abnormal protein found in obstructive jaundice and LCAT deficiency	Lpx
Clinical Chemistry    Electrophoretic pattern from Lipoprotein electrophoresis from the most anodal to the least	HDL > VLDL > LDL > Chylomicron
Clinical Chemistry    CDC Reference method for HDL determination	3 Step Method:Ultracentrifugation > Heparin Mn Precipitation > Abell-Kendall Assay
Clinical Chemistry    Most popular method in HDL Quantitation	Homogenous assay
Clinical Chemistry    Preferred Sample for Lipoprotein Methodologies	Serum from Serum Separator Tubes
Clinical Chemistry    Specimen of Choice for Lipprotein Ultracentrifugation and Electrophoresis	EDTA Plasma
Clinical Chemistry    Beta Quantification combines which methodologies?	Ultracentrifugation and Chemical Precipitation
Clinical Chemistry    aka Abetalipoproteinemia	Bassen-Kornzweiz Syndrome
Clinical Chemistry    Inherited Neurodegenerative Disorder resulting in accumulation of Sphingolipids in the brain	Tay-Sachs Disease
Clinical Chemistry    Tay-Sach's Disease is characterized by deficiency of what enzyme?	Hexosaminidase A
Clinical Chemistry    Fat soluble Vitamin not deficient in Abetalipoproteinemia	Vitamin D
Clinical Chemistry    Complete Absence of HDL due to mutation in ABCA1 gene on chromosome 9	Tangier's Disease
Clinical Chemistry    The process by which fluorescence of an analyte is reduced due to the excited molecule losing some of its energy by interacting with other substances in a solution is known as:	Quenching
Clinical Chemistry    Protein Structure maintained by electrovalent linkages, hydrogen bonds, disulfide bridges, Van der Waals and hydrophobic interactions	Tertiary Structure
Clinical Chemistry    Alpha 1 Acid Glycoprotein is also known as	Orsomucoid
Clinical Chemistry    Alpha 1 Acid Glycoprotein has the greatest affinity to what substance?	Progesterone
Clinical Chemistry    Hemopexin has the strongest affinity for what substance?	Heme
Clinical Chemistry    Alpha 2 glycoprotein that has similar structure to immunoglobulins; It has 2 light and 2 heavy chains linked by disulfide bonds.	Haptoglobin
Clinical Chemistry    The largest major non-immunoglobulin in plasma	Alpha 2 Macroglobulin
Clinical Chemistry    Common cause of dialysis associated amyloidosis	Beta 2 Microglobulin
Clinical Chemistry    A protein that appears as a distinct band between the Beta and Gamma Globulins	Fibrinogen
Clinical Chemistry    In serum protein electrophoresis, a protein that appears as a distinct band between the Beta and Gamma Globulin is indicative of:	Usage of a wrong specimen (Plasma is used)
Clinical Chemistry    Most abundant Complement	C3
Clinical Chemistry    Largest Complement Protein	C1
Clinical Chemistry    Serum banding appearing in CSF is indicative of:	Leukemia or Lymphoma or Viral Infections
Clinical Chemistry    Aminoacidopathy characterized by impaired activity of cystathionine beta synthetase	Homocystinuria
Clinical Chemistry    Aminoacidopathy characterized by reduced or absence of alpha ketoacid decarboxylase	Maple Syrup Urine Disease
Clinical Chemistry    Prime metabolite of PKU	phenylpyruvic acid
Clinical Chemistry    Tyrosinemia is accmpanied by what substances in blood	methionine and p-hydroxyphenylpyruvic acid
Clinical Chemistry    Reference method for Urea Analysis	Isotope Dilution Mass Spectrometry
Clinical Chemistry    aka creatine	alpha methyl guanidoacetic acid
Clinical Chemistry    Composition of Lloyd's Reagent	Sodium Aluminum Silicate
Clinical Chemistry    Composition of Fuller's Earth Reagent	Aluminum Magnesium Silicate
Clinical Chemistry    Reference Method for Creatinine Determination	Isotope Dilution Mass Spectrometry
Clinical Chemistry    Plasma creatinine is a _____ marker of renal disease   A. sensitive B. insensitive	B. Insensitive   NB: It is not measurably increased until renal fxn has deteriorated more than 50%
Clinical Chemistry    Elevated concentration of NPN in blood	Azotemia
Clinical Chemistry    Common cause of pre renal azotemia	Decreased Renal Blood Flow
Clinical Chemistry    Mechanism of Post Renal Azotemia	Back diffusion of urea into circulation due to urinary tract obstruction
Clinical Chemistry    Immediate precursor of Uric Acid	Xanthine
Clinical Chemistry    Definitive diagnosis of gout	Birefringent crystals in synovial fluid
Clinical Chemistry    Lesch Nyhan syndrome is an inborn error of purine metabolism characterized by the deficiency of what enzyme	Hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyl transferase (HGPRT)
Clinical Chemistry    Uric acid has a peak absorbance at what wavelength	293 nm
Clinical Chemistry    Mode of measurement in the one step enzymatic assay in uric acid determination using uricase	Measuring the decrease in absorbance at 293nm as uric acid is converted to allantoin
Clinical Chemistry    Reference Method for Uric Acid Determination	Isotope Dilution Mass Spectrometry
Clinical Chemistry    Simplest Test of Renal Concentrating Ability	Specific Gravity
Clinical Chemistry    Normal Urine to Serum Osmolality Ratio	1:1
Clinical Chemistry    Formula for Computing Serum Osmolality	(1.86 x Na) + Glucose mmol/L + BUN mmol/L or(1.86 x Na) + (Glucose[mg/dL] / 18) + (BUN[mg/dl] / 2.8)
Clinical Chemistry    A gap between measured osmolality to calculated osmolality is called	osmolal gap
Clinical Chemistry    Osmolal gap is caused by:	Accumulation of Non electrolyte solutions in serum
Clinical Chemistry    amount of blood received by the liver per minute	15mL/min
Clinical Chemistry    Serum Electrophoretic Pattern: Gamma Spike  It is indicative of:	Multiple Myeloma
Clinical Chemistry    Serum Electrophoretic Pattern: Beta Gamma Bridging  It is indicative of	Hepatic Cirrhosis
Clinical Chemistry    Serum Electrophoretic Pattern: Alpha 2 globulin band spike  It is indicative of	Nephrotic Syndrome
Clinical Chemistry    Serum Electrophoretic Pattern: Alpha 1 globulin Flat Curve  It is indicative of:	Juvenile Cirrhosis
Clinical Chemistry    Normal A/G ratio	1.3:1 to 3:1
Clinical Chemistry    Converts Heme to Biliverdin	Heme oxygenase
Clinical Chemistry    Familial form of unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia caused by circulating inhibitor of bilirubin conjugation	Lucey-Driscoll Syndrome
Clinical Chemistry    At what level when ictersia becomes visible	>2.5 mg/dL>25 mg/L
Clinical Chemistry    Function of Ascorbic acid in Jendrassic and Grof	Terminates the initial reaction; destroys excess diazo reagent
Clinical Chemistry    Incubation time for measurment of total bilirubin after the addition of accelerator	15 minutes
Clinical Chemistry    Dose of Rosenthal White Method	2mg/kg body weight
Clinical Chemistry    Dose of Mac Donald Method	5 mg/kg BW
Clinical Chemistry    collection time of Rosenthal White method	at 5 minutes and at 30 minutes post injection
Clinical Chemistry    Time of specimen colection of Mac Donald Method	after 4 minutes
Clinical Chemistry    Normal Value of BSP for Rosenthal and Mac Donald	Rosenthal: After 5 minutes: 50% retention After 30 minutes: 0% retention   Mac Donald: After 45 minutes: +/- 5% retention
Clinical Chemistry    NV of Urine Urobilinogen	0.1-1.0 Ehrlich Units/2hour
Clinical Chemistry    One important mechanism of ammonia toxicity is the lowering of the concentration of _______	gamma aminobutyric acid
Clinical Chemistry    Berthelot reagent is composed of:	Phenol & Hypochlorite
Clinical Chemistry    What is the product when ammonia is reacted with Berthelot reagent	Indophenol blue
Clinical Chemistry    A split in the albumin band in SPE producing two albumin bands	Bisalbuminemia
Clinical Chemistry    LDH isoenzyme found in lungs	LD3
Clinical Chemistry     A decreased LDH/HBD ratio is significant for diagnosis of:	Myocardial infarction
Clinical Chemistry    Arrange LD isoenzymes from the most abundant in serum	2>1>3>4>5
Clinical Chemistry    Substrate exhibiting high specificity for prostatic AcP	Thymolphthalein monophosphate
Clinical Chemistry    Best substrate for AcP endpoint	Thymolphthalein monophosphate
Clinical Chemistry    Substrate of choice for quantitative endpoint AcP determination	Thymolphthalein monophosphate
Clinical Chemistry    Substrate of choice for AcP kinetic continuous monitoring assays	Alpha naphthyl phosphate
Clinical Chemistry    What does the Temperature Coefficient (Q10) mean?	Every 10 degrees Celsius increase in temperature will have a two-fold increase in enzyme activity
Clinical Chemistry    Which is easier to measure:  A. Small increases of a product B. Small decreases in a large amount of substrate	A. Small increases of a product
Clinical Chemistry    What is the substrate concentration needed to achieve zero order kinetics	>99 x Km
Clinical Chemistry    Function of Alkaline Phosphatase   a. Liberate inorganic phosphate from inorganic ester b. Liberate inorganic phosphate from organic ester c. Liberate organic phosphate from organic ester d. Liberate organic phosphate from inorganic ester	b. Liberate inorganic phosphate from organic ester
Clinical Chemistry    What blood group increases intestinal ALP after consumption of a fatty meal	Blood Groups B and O
Clinical Chemistry    Substance that inhibits Regan ALP	Phenylalanine
Clinical Chemistry    Substance that inhibits Nagao ALP	Phenylalanine and L-leucine
Clinical Chemistry    Most specific method for ALP quantitation	Bowers and McComb (Szasz modification)
Clinical Chemistry    Buffer used in Bowers-McComb method	2-amino-2-methyl-1-propanol (AMP) buffer
Clinical Chemistry    Function of AMP buffer	binds phosphorus   NB: phosphorus is an inhibitor
Clinical Chemistry    pH optimum of AcP	5.0
Clinical Chemistry    Substrate in Roy and Hillman AcP	Thymolphthalein Monophosphate
Clinical Chemistry    Substrate in Babson Read and Phillips	Alpha naphthyl phosphate
Clinical Chemistry    Inhibitor for prostatic AcP	20mM L-tartrate
Clinical Chemistry    inhibitor for RBC AcP	1mM CuSO4 and 2% formaldehyde
Clinical Chemistry    Enzymatic method used for measurement of aminotransferases	Karmen
Clinical Chemistry    Coupled enzymatic reaction for aminotransferases State the: 1.Color developer/intensifier 2.End Product 3.Indicator(product) 4.Name of Method	1 = 2,4 Dinitrophenylhydrazine 2 = Glutamate and Oxaloacetic Acid(AST) or Pyruvic Acid (ALP) 3 = 2,4 Dinitrophenylhydrazone 4 = Reitman and Frankel
Clinical Chemistry    Severe viral or toxic hepatitis may produce elevations of transferase up to ___ times the normal limit	20x
Clinical Chemistry    Other name for ALT:AST ratio	DeRitis ratio
Clinical Chemistry    De Ritis ratio in acute hepatitis	>1.0
Clinical Chemistry    What is the name and size of the smallest enzyme	Amylase 50,000-55,000 Daltons
Clinical Chemistry    Most predominant pancreatic amylase isoenzyme in acute pancreatitis	P3
Clinical Chemistry    Classic reference method for amylase	Saccharogenic
Clinical Chemistry    Inhibitor of Salivary Amylase isoenzyme	Wheat germ lectin
Clinical Chemistry    Condition wherein AMS combines with Ig	Macroamylasemia
Clinical Chemistry    Lipase reference method	Cherry Crandal
Clinical Chemistry    Most commonly used method in measuring lipase	Peroxidase Coupling
Clinical Chemistry    Predominant LD cancer marker	LD3
Clinical Chemistry    LD6 or the 6th band in LDH electrophoresis is actually:	Alcohol dehydrogenase
Clinical Chemistry    LD isoenzyme that prefers the forward reaction	LD1
Clinical Chemistry    LD isoenzyme that prefers the reverse reaction	LD-5
Clinical Chemistry    reaction pH of Wacker Method	8.8
Clinical Chemistry    Reaction pH of Wrobleuski La Due	7.2
Clinical Chemistry    Another substrate for LDH in addition to lactate	alpha hydroxybutyrate
Clinical Chemistry    alpha hydroxybutyrate represents the activity of what enzyme	LD1
Clinical Chemistry    reaction pH of Tanzer-Gilvarg	9.0
Clinical Chemistry    reaction pH of Oliver-Rosalki	6.8
Clinical Chemistry    What is released by hemolysed RBCs that interferes with CK assay?	Adenylate kinase
Clinical Chemistry    What is used to inhibit adenylate kinase	Adenosine Monophosphate
Clinical Chemistry    Reducing agent used in CK reagent to reverse the oxidation of sulfhydryl groups	N-acetylcysteine
Clinical Chemistry    Reference method for CK	Electrophoresis
Clinical Chemistry    Enyzme that splits fructose 1,6 diphosphate to two triose phosphate molecules	Aldolase
Clinical Chemistry    Aldolase isoenzyme found in WBC	Aldolase B
Clinical Chemistry    Aldolase isoenzyme found in brain	Aldolase C
Clinical Chemistry    Enzyme used to differentiate the source of increased ALP	GGT  NB: GGT is elevated in All hepatobiliary disorders
Clinical Chemistry    Most common electrolyte disorder	Hyponatremia
Clinical Chemistry    What is the effect of hyperkalemia to the membrane potential of the cell	Increased potassium decreases the resting membrane potential
Clinical Chemistry    What is the effect of low potassium levels to sodium levels?	Lowers the sodium level   NB: Low potassium will stimulate the nephron to conserve potassium at the expense of sodium
Clinical Chemistry    What is the titrant and the end product in Whitehorn Titration	Hg(SCN)2; reddish complex
Clinical Chemistry    What is Whitehorn Titration?	Spectrophotometric Test for Chloride
Clinical Chemistry    Principle of Cotlove Chloridometer	Coulometric Amperometric Titration
Clinical Chemistry    Calcium is maximally absorbed in what part of the small intestine?	Duodenum
Clinical Chemistry    What is the reagent used in Clark Collip Precipitation and  Ferro Ham Precipitation	Clark Collip: Oxalic Acid Ferro Ham: Chloranilic acid
Clinical Chemistry    NV: Total and Ionized Calcium	Total 8.6-10 mg/dL iCa 4.6-5.3 mg/dL
Clinical Chemistry    What substances are involved in the insulin mediated entry of glucose into cells	Phosphate and Potassium   NB: Phosphate = phosphorylation of glucose
Clinical Chemistry    element measured and end product of Calmagite Method	Mg; reddish-violet complex
Clinical Chemistry    Dye Lake Method for Mg uses what dye	Titan Yellow Dye
Clinical Chemistry    Anion gap is used primarily in the detection of what acid-base imbalance?	Metabolic acidosis
Clinical Chemistry    Phophorus is maximally absorbed in what part of the small intestine	jejunum
Clinical Chemistry    Rapid compensation occurs in what type of Acid Base Imbalance	Metabolic Acidosis/Alkalosis
Clinical Chemistry    More complete and thorough compensation occurs in what type of Acid Base imbalance	Respiratory Acidosis/Alkalosis
Clinical Chemistry    Two forms of acid eliminated in the body	Titrable acid (H+) and ammonium
Clinical Chemistry    Form of acidosis that causes a greater efflux of Potassium	Metabolic
Clinical Chemistry    Among the four acid base disorders which disorder is affected least by compensation	Metabolic alkalosis
Clinical Chemistry    Anticoagulant/blood ratio in ABG	0.05 heparin/mL blood
Clinical Chemistry    Beri-beri is caused by deficiency of	Thiamine
Clinical Chemistry    Vitamin source of FADH2	Riboflavin
Clinical Chemistry    It is the core of all sterols and steroid hormones	cyclopentanoperhydrophenanthrene
Clinical Chemistry    Transport protein used to gauge intravascular hemolysis. The decrease of which indicates increased hemolysis	Haptoglobin
Clinical Chemistry    Effect of exposure of arterial blood to room air A. increase PCO2; increase O2 B. increase PCO2; decrease O2 C. decrease PCO2; decrease O2 D. decrease PCO2; increase O2	D. decrease PCO2; increase O2
Clinical Chemistry    The Kober reaction is used in the assay of:	Progesterone
Clinical Chemistry    The assay employed for 17-ketosteroids, in which steroids react with m-dinitrobenzene in alcoholic KOH solution resulting to the formation of a purple color	Zimmerman Reaction
Clinical Chemistry    The medication of choice for treatment of manic-depression	Lithium carbonate
Clinical Chemistry    A marked increase in 5-HIAA excretion occurs in patients with	Argentaffinoma
Clinical Chemistry    The only test to evaluate the conjugation function of the liver	Hippuric Acid Test or Quick's Test
Clinical Chemistry    Rough Estimate of the Bilirubin content in newborns	Icterus Index (using potassium dichromate standard)
Clinical Chemistry    When left standing, ammonia levels becomes falsely _____ due to _______	elevated; deamination of glutamine
Clinical Chemistry    At what concentration of bilirubin does serum acquire a dark yellow color	>20 mg/dL
Clinical Chemistry    Biochemical pathway responsible for the greatest portion of drug metabolism	Mixed Function Oxidase System
Clinical Chemistry    Conversion Factor: Calcium mg/dL to mmol/L	0.25
Clinical Chemistry    Conversion Factor: Cholesterol mg/dL -> mmol/L	0.026
Clinical Chemistry    Conversion Factor: TAG mg/dL -> mmol/L	0.0113
Clinical Chemistry    Conversion Factor: BUA mg/dL -> mmol/L	0.0595
Clinical Chemistry    Most signifcant source of ammonia contamination in ammonia measurement	Cigarette smoking
Clinical Chemistry    Danger of kernicterus is a certainty at levels exceeding:	20 mg/dL
Clinical Chemistry    At what levels does bilirubin interfere in assays for albumin, TP, and cholesterol	25 mg/dL
Clinical Chemistry    alpha 2 globulins:	Haptoblobin Ceruloplasmin alpha-2-macroglobulin
Clinical Chemistry    What type of hyperlipoproteinemia does Beta VLDL accumulate?	Type 3 Hyperlipoproteinemia
Clinical Chemistry    NCEP Range for Cholesterol	Desirable <200 Borderline High 200-239 High >= 240
Clinical Chemistry    NCEP Triglyceride Very High Level	>= 500 mg/dL
Clinical Chemistry    As little as 10% contamination with 5% dextrose will increase glucose sample in blood by at least:	500 mg/dL
Hematology   Michaelis-Menten Equation	V = (Vmax * S) / (Km+S)
Hematology   What enzyme category does aldolase belong?	Lyases
Hematology   Peak levels of these enzymes in MI occur at what period? CK-MB AST LD	CK-MB 12-24 hrs AST 24 hrs LD 72 hrs
"Hematology   ""Routine"" measurement of electrolytes measure what ions?"	Na, K, Cl, HCO3
Hematology   Anion Gap reference range	10-20 mmol/L
Hematology   Na and K imbalances of end stage renal disease	Hyponatremia Hyperkalemia
Hematology   Most abundant hormone in the adenohypophysis	Growth hormone
Hematology   Hypopituitarism caused by ischemic necrosis due to blood loss and hypovlemic shock during and after childbirth	Sheehan's syndrome
Clinical Chemistry    For each degree of fever, pCO2 will increase by:	3%/degree of fever
Clinical Chemistry    For each degree of fever, pO2 will decrease by:	7%/degree of fever
Clinical Chemistry    Drugs derived from plants (genus Erythroxylon)	Cocaine
Clinical Chemistry    Cocaine is derived from	Erythroxylon spp.
Clinical Chemistry    Alcohol inhibits what hormone?	ADH
"Clinical Chemistry    ""Hangover symptoms"" are the effect of what substance?"	acetaldehyde
Clinical Chemistry    Antidote for alcoholic mania	Diazepam
Clinical Chemistry    Antidote for Isopropanol	Activated charcoal
Clinical Chemistry    Toxicity of arsenic is due to	High affinity to thiol groups in proteins
Clinical Chemistry    Heavy metal that is a significant environmental pollutant. Used in electroplating and galvanizing	Cadmium
"Clinical Chemistry    Heavy metal poisoning with a characteristic ""wrist drop"" or ""foot drop"" manifestation (peripheral neuropathy)"	Lead poisoning
Clinical Chemistry    Toxicity of mercury is due to	binding with sulfhydryl groups in proteins
Clinical Chemistry    Mercury inhibits what enzyme?	Catechol o-methyltransferase (COMT)
Clinical Chemistry    Cocaine can cause sudden death due to direct toxicity on what tissue	Myocardium
Clinical Chemistry    Methaqualone is a a. stimulant b. anti-convulsant c. antitussive d. analgesic	c. antitussive
Clinical Chemistry    Amino acid precursor of thyroid hormones	tyrosine
Clinical Chemistry    What is the blood alcohol level when there is coma and possible death	0.35-0.50%
Clinical Chemistry    What is the blood alcohol level when there is some impairment of motor skills	0.03-0.12 %
Clinical Chemistry    What is the blood alcohol level when there is impairment of conciousness and inability to stand or walk	0.27-0.40 %
Clinical Chemistry    What is the blood alcohol level when there is loss of critical judgment and memory impairment?	0.09-0.25%
Clinical Chemistry    What is the blood alcohol level when there is strong impairment of motor skills and mental confusion	0.18-0.30%
Clinical Chemistry    What is the blood alcohol level when there is no obvious impairment of function	0.01-0.05%
Clinical Chemistry    Legal intoxication is when there is a blood alcohol concentration of:	>100 mg/dL or >3-4 whiskey ounces
Clinical Chemistry    Arsenic has high affinity for what structural protein?	keratin
Clinical Chemistry    Most prominent drug among the benzodiazepines	Valium
Clinical Chemistry    T test compares the: A. accuracy B. precision C. both D. none	A. accuracy
Clinical Chemistry    F test compares the: A. accuracy B. precision C. both D. none	B. precision
Clinical Chemistry    Formula for RCF	RPM2 x r x 1.118 x 10-5
Clinical Chemistry    Angle Head Centrifuge has an angle pof	25-52 degrees
Clinical Chemistry    Calibrate Centrifuge RPM every ______ Calibrate Centrifuge Timer every ______ Disinfect Centrifuge ______	RPM: 3 Months Timer: 1 Month Disinfect: Weekly
Clinical Chemistry    These are used in wavelength calibration	Didymium filter Cobalt chloride Potassium dichromate
Clinical Chemistry    Dilution of serum in Flame emission photometry	1:100-1:200
Clinical Chemistry    Optional layers for Kodak Ektachem	Scavenger and Indicator Layer
Clinical Chemistry    In continuous flow analyzers, the reactants are separated by:	Air Bubbles
Clinical Chemistry    The major problem in Continuous Flow Analyzers is:	Significant Carry Overs
Clinical Chemistry    TDM: Peak sample is taken ______ Trough sample is taken ______	Peak: 30 minutes after the dose Trough: before the next dose
Clinical Chemistry    When sodium fluoride is used as an antiglycolytic, what is the substance:blood ratio	2mg/mL blood
Clinical Chemistry    When sodium fluoride is used as an anticoagulant, what is the AC:blood ratio?	6-10mg/mL blood
Clinical Chemistry    What are the photolabile analytes in CC?	Bilirubin CK
Clinical Chemistry    A lipemic serum has TAG levels greater than _______	greater than 400 mg/dL
Clinical Chemistry    Why is CK elevated in hemolyzed blood?	Adenylate kinase cross reacts with the reagents for CK
Clinical Chemistry    What is added to fix the interference from adenylate kinase	Adenosine Monophosphate
Clinical Chemistry    Ability of the method to maintain accuracy and precision over an extended period of time	Reliability
"Clinical Chemistry    Defined as ""The closeness of agreement between results of successive intruments carried out under the same condition"""	Repeatable
"Clinical Chemistry    Defined as ""The closeness of agreement between results of measurements performed under changed conditions of measurements"""	Reproducibility
Clinical Chemistry    The degree to which a method is easily repeated	Practicability
Clinical Chemistry    Material of known concentration used to calibrate the instrument	Standard
Clinical Chemistry    Material that resembles the patient specimen that is analyzed with patient samples to determine acceptability of results	Control
