#separator:tab
#html:false
Found substance that transformed bacteria from nonvirulant to virulent form	Griffith
Identified DNA as substance that transformered nonvirulent bacteria to virulent form	Avery, McLeod, and McCarty
Determined that DNA carries genetic material, not protein	Chase and Hershey
Discovered DNA's helical structure	Franklin
Which process was used in determining DNA's helical structure	X-Ray Diffraction
Who discovered nitrogenous base ratios?	Chargaff
Which process was used in discovering nitrogenous base ratios?	Biochemical analysis
The rule of nitrogenous base ratio are referred to as what?	Chargaff's Rule
Who developed the double helix model of DNA?	Watson and Crick
What is on the outside of a DNA model?	sugar-phosphate backbone
What's in the middle of a DNA model?	Two poly nucleotide strands wound around each other
What's inside a DNA model?	Nitrogenous bases
How many base pairs are in each double helix turn?	10
How are DNA strands that run in opposite directions referred?	Antiparallel
Are the end of polynucleotide chains the same?	No
3' (3 prime) carbon of a deoxyribose sugar are attached to what?	A Hydroxyl (OH) group
A (5 prime) 5' carbon of deoxyribose is attached to what?	A Phosphate group
The nucleotide sugar	Deoxyribose
The nucleotide group	Phosphate group
Nucleotides contain what kind of bases?	Nitrogenous Bases
These single-ring structeres include Thymine, Cytosine, and Uracil	Pyrimidines
These double-ring structures include Adenine and Guanine	Purines
Are purines or pyrimidines smaller?	Pyrimidines
Are purines or pyrimidines larger?	Purines
What is the backbone made of?	Sugars and Phosphates
Do sugars and phosphate occur in a repeating pattern?	Yes
Why does the backbone have a negative charge?	Because of the negative charge on phosphate group
What links nucleotides?	Phosphodiester bonds
Where are phosphodiester bond links on backbone?	Between 5' carbon on one sugar, and 3' carbon on the next sugar
A pairs with what?	T
G pairs with what?	C
What are held together by two hydrogen bonds?	Adenine and Thymine
What are held together by three hydrgen bonds?	Guanine and Cytosine
Base pairings follow whose rules?	Chargaff's Rules
Model of replication is know as what kind of replication exactly?	SemiConservative
What must occur for replication to occur?	Parental strands unwind
Each strand serves as a [...] new strands. Each strand serves as a {{c1::template}} new strands.	Each strand serves as a template new strands.
During replication, strands are labeled what?	old and new strands
A replication bubble is initiated by what?	Special proteins
Where do the events of DNA replication occur?	the Replisome
The replication factor is also what?	Replisome
The replication factor contains what key materials important for DNA replication?	Key proteins and  enzymes
What is the replisome attached to?	the Nuclear Matrix
Where does the replisome attach to the nuclear matrix?	At certain locations
Does the replisome move or stay still?	Remains stationary
Where does the DNA to be replicated travel?	Moves through the replisome
Where does DNA begin to unwind?	At the Ori site of the chromosome
How many Ori do eukaryotes have?	Multiple
What unwinds the double helix?	the enzyme Helicase
How does Helicase unwind the double helix?	Uses energy from ATP
What produces the replication fork?	Helicase
What prevents reforming of double helix?	Single stranded binding proteins
How does single stranded binding proteins effct DNA?	stabilizes the single strand of DNA
What relieves overwinding of the strain?	the enzyme Topoisomerase
Where does Topiosomerase help DNA?	ahead of replication fork
How does Topoisomerase relieve overwinding?	Creates cuts in DNA
Synthesis of new DNA is intitiated by what?	Primer
The Primer is synthesized by what enzyme?	Primase
What is a short strand of RNA, 10-12 nucleotides long?	Primer
What forms a complimentary DNA strand?	DNA Polymerase III
How is a complimentary strand added?	Adds complimentary bases to DNA template
In which direction are complimentary bases added?	At 3' to 5' direction
What anchors DNA polymerase III to template strand?	the Sliding Clamp protein
New DNA strands are synthesized continuously or discontinuously?	Both continuously and discontinuously
The addition of nucleotides in continuously synthesized DNA are directed in which direction from the replictaion fork?	Away
Continuously adddition of nucleotides in replication is called what?	The leading strand
New DNA synthizes discontinuously with addition of nucleotides in which direction from the replication fork?	Towards
Addition of nucleotides discontinuously is called what?	Lagging Strand
Short lengths of DNA fragments present in the lagging strand	Okazaki fragments
First step of lagging strand DNA synthesis?	Synthesis of DNA fragment
Second Step of Lagging Strand DNA synthesis?	Complimentary nucleotide added
Where is the complimentary nucleotide added to during DNA synthesis of lagging strand?	to the Template Strand
After complimentary nucleotide added to the lagging strand, what happens?	Syntheis of another RNA primer
After second RNA primer is added to lagging strand, what is next?	Another complimentary necleotide is added
Once second complimentary nucleotide is added to lagging strand, what happens next?	Previously synthesized RNA primers are removed
What are the RNA primers called?	DNA Polymerase I
What is the gap that remains in the lagging strand called?	a nick
What seals the nicks in the lagging strand?	DNA Ligase
